              nanomaterials

Review
Carbon-Enhanced Hydrated Salt Phase Change Materials for
Thermal Management Applications
Yizhe Liu 1,2 , Xiaoxiang Li 1 , Yangzhe Xu 1 , Yixuan Xie 1 , Ting Hu 1 and Peng Tao 1,3, *

                                              1   State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, School of Materials Science and Engineering,
                                                  Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dong Chuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China; 780145898@sjtu.edu.cn (Y.L.);
                                                  lixiaoxiang@sjtu.edu.cn (X.L.); xuyz1998@sjtu.edu.cn (Y.X.); xyx0408@sjtu.edu.cn (Y.X.);
                                                  ht-huting@sjtu.edu.cn (T.H.)
                                              2   Materials Genome Initiative Center, School of Materials Science and Engineering,
                                                  Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dong Chuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China
                                              3   National Engineering Research Center of Special Equipment and Power System for Ship and Marine Engineering,
                                                  Shanghai 200030, China
                                              *   Correspondence: taopeng@sjtu.edu.cn


                                              Abstract: Inorganic hydrated salt phase change materials (PCMs) hold promise for improving
                                              the energy conversion efficiency of thermal systems and facilitating the exploration of renewable
                                              thermal energy. Hydrated salts, however, often suffer from low thermal conductivity, supercooling,
                                              phase separation, leakage and poor solar absorptance. In recent years, compounding hydrated salts
                                              with functional carbon materials has emerged as a promising way to overcome these shortcomings
                                              and meet the application demands. This work reviews the recent progress in preparing carbon-
                                              enhanced hydrated salt phase change composites for thermal management applications. The intrinsic
                                              properties of hydrated salts and their shortcomings are firstly introduced. Then, the advantages of
                                              various carbon materials and general approaches for preparing carbon-enhanced hydrated salt PCM
                                              composites are briefly described. By introducing representative PCM composites loaded with carbon
                                              nanotubes, carbon fibers, graphene oxide, graphene, expanded graphite, biochar, activated carbon
                                              and multifunctional carbon, the ways that one-dimensional, two-dimensional, three-dimensional
                                              and hybrid carbon materials enhance the comprehensive thermophysical properties of hydrated
Citation: Liu, Y.; Li, X.; Xu, Y.; Xie, Y.;
                                              salts and affect their phase change behavior is systematically discussed. Through analyzing the
Hu, T.; Tao, P. Carbon-Enhanced
                                              enhancement effects of different carbon fillers, the rationale for achieving the optimal performance of
Hydrated Salt Phase Change
                                              the PCM composites, including both thermal conductivity and phase change stability, is summarized.
Materials for Thermal Management
                                              Regarding the applications of carbon-enhanced hydrate salt composites, their use for the thermal
Applications. Nanomaterials 2024, 14,
1077. https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                              management of electronic devices, buildings and the human body is highlighted. Finally, research
nano14131077                                  challenges for further improving the overall thermophysical properties of carbon-enhanced hydrated
                                              salt PCMs and pushing towards practical applications and potential research directions are discussed.
Academic Editor: S. M. Sohel
                                              It is expected that this timely review could provide valuable guidelines for the further development
Murshed
                                              of carbon-enhanced hydrated salt composites and stimulate concerted research efforts from diverse
Received: 10 May 2024                         communities to promote the widespread applications of high-performance PCM composites.
Revised: 19 June 2024
Accepted: 20 June 2024                        Keywords: hydrated salt; phase change material; carbon; thermal storage; thermal management
Published: 24 June 2024




                                              1. Introduction
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.                 Thermal energy, which accounts for ~50% of energy end-use, is the cornerstone of
This article is an open access article        the global energy supply and consumption chain [1]. For example, keeping houses within
distributed under the terms and               a comfortable temperature range regardless of climate change and generating hot water
conditions of the Creative Commons            consume about half of the overall energy used by buildings [2]. To date, more than 70% of
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://         consumed thermal energy comes from the burning of fossil fuels, which calls for the urgent
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/              exploration of cleaner renewable energy alternatives [3,4]. The energy supply from renew-
4.0/).                                        able sources such as the Sun, however, is not stable and the energy power density is often



Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano14131077                                          https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nanomaterials
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                          2 of 28




                               quite low [5,6]. Addressing the intermittency issue is a prerequisite to developing advanced
                               renewable heating technologies. Another fact is that a large portion of thermal energy is
                               wasted during various energy conversion processes [7], which not only sacrifices energy
                               utilization efficiency but also poses safety concerns. Undesired temperature changes, either
                               rising or dropping, adversely affect the performance of many electronic devices [8–10].
                               How to manage excessive heating and stabilize these devices within the desired tempera-
                               ture range without consuming extra energy has attracted increasing attention.
                                     Solid–liquid phase change materials (PCMs), which can absorb a large amount of
                               heat during their melting processes and release the heat in the subsequent solidification
                               processes [10–12], offer a promising solution to overcome the intermittency of renewable
                               energy and smartly manage the excessive heating of electronic devices [13]. In recent years,
                               inorganic hydrated salts have garnered tremendous attention owing to their large specific
                               heat storage capacity, suitable and tailorable phase change temperatures, and notable ad-
                               vantages in cost-effectiveness and nonflammability over their organic counterparts [14–17].
                               These attractive features spurred the exploration of hydrated salts for the phase change
                               management of thermal energy, including both harvesting and storage of renewable ther-
                               mal energy and controlling the temperature of buildings, electronic devices and human
                               bodies [2,18–21]. Hydrated salts, however, suffer from several common shortcomings
                               including low thermal conductivity, supercooling, poor heating/cooling cycling stability,
                               low solar absorptance, a tendency to phase separate, leakage and loss of crystallization
                               water and strong corrosiveness [16,22–25]. Compounding hydrated salts with functional
                               fillers has been pursued as the mainstream route to address these issues [26,27].
                                     Among the various fillers investigated so far, carbon materials have emerged as one of
                               the favorites for comprehensively improving the thermophysical properties of hydrated
                               salts because they possess various desired features, such as high thermal conductivity,
                               strong solar absorptance, large specific surface area, light weight, and an abundance of
                               low-cost raw materials [16,23,28–30]. In recent years, attempts have been made to com-
                               pound hydrated salts with different carbon fillers, including one-dimensional (1D) carbon
                               nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon fibers (CFs); two-dimensional (2D) graphene oxide (GO), re-
                               duced graphene oxide (rGO) and graphene; and three-dimensional (3D) expanded graphite
                               (EG), biochar and activated carbon (Figure 1). Compared with pristine hydrated salts, the
                               carbon-enhanced hydrated salt composites have demonstrated improved thermophysical
                               properties, including high thermal conductivity, suppressed supercooling and strong re-
                               sistance to phase separation and liquid leakage. The carbon-enhanced hydrated salt PCM
                               composites combine the advantageous features from both the low-cost inorganic PCM
                               components and the abundant carbon fillers to fulfill the potential for diverse thermal-
                               related applications. Through introducing other functional fillers, the carbon-enhanced
                               hydrated salt composites have exhibited extra functionalities, such as the direct conversion
                               and storage of electro-thermal and magneto-thermal energy and dynamic tuning of the
                               thermal energy charging and discharging processes. Meanwhile, the thermal conductivity,
                               specific surface area, and surface chemistry vary for different carbon fillers, which in turn
                               affect their compounding with hydrated salts and the enhancement of thermophysical
                               properties. The selection of appropriate types of carbon fillers, loading levels and com-
                               pounding processes is critical to achieving the optimal performance of carbon-enhanced
                               hydrated salt PCM composites.
                                     Despite the fact that recent years have witnessed the rapid development of carbon-
                               enhanced hydrated salt PCM composites, a systematic review to summarize how different
                               category of carbon fillers (1D, 2D, 3D and hybrid) enhance the thermophysical properties
                               of hydrated salts and enable their promising applications is lacking. To bridge this gap,
                               herein we provide a comprehensive review of the state-of-the-art development of carbon-
                               enhanced hydrated salt PCM composites, aiming at highlighting the design principles,
                               fabrication strategies, governing enhancement mechanisms and application potentials. We
                               firstly introduce the solid–liquid phase change process and the advantageous features and
                               shortcomings of hydrated salts for the storage and management of thermal energy. We then
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                          3 of 28




                                    briefly describe how various carbon materials can enhance the thermophysical properties
                                    of hydrated salts and the typical methods for fabricating carbon-enhanced hydrated salt
                                    PCM composites. By examining representative examples, we discuss how the intrinsic
                                   properties of various carbon materials, such as thermal conductivity, surface chemistry,
                                    morphology, microstructure and their loading and dispersion affect the performances of the
                                    resultant hydrated salt composites, including heat transfer behavior, reversible solid–liquid
                                   phase change stability, anti-leakage, solar–thermal conversion, and additionally afforded
                                    functionalities. Regarding the applications of carbon-enhanced hydrated salt composites,
                                   we focus on the thermal management of electronic devices, buildings and human bodies
                                    by taking advantage of their suitable phase change temperature ranges. Finally, we point
                                    out current research needs and future research directions to clarify enhancement mecha-
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                  3 of 30
                                    nisms, develop more advanced fabrication techniques, comprehensively improve overall
                                    thermophysical properties and explore diverse applications.




                                Figure 1. Hydrated
                                Figure 1. Hydrated salt
                                                   salt PCMs
                                                        PCMs enhanced
                                                             enhanced by
                                                                      by various
                                                                         various functional carbon materials.
                                                                                 functional carbon materials.

                                2. Hydrated
                                    Despite Salt PCMs
                                            the fact that recent years have witnessed the rapid development of carbon-
                                enhanced    hydrated
                                      Hydrated    salts,salt
                                                        whichPCM cancomposites,
                                                                       be generallya expressed      Mp Xq ·to
                                                                                      systematicasreview     nHsummarize
                                                                                                                 2 O, rely onhow    diﬀerent
                                                                                                                               the reversible
                                category   of carbon fillers
                                melting–solidification         (1D,transition
                                                            phase     2D, 3D and    hybrid)large-capacity
                                                                                 to realize   enhance the thermophysical
                                                                                                               storage and theproperties
                                                                                                                                   release of
                                thermal
                                of        energy
                                   hydrated    saltswithin  narrowtheir
                                                      and enable        temperature
                                                                            promisingranges.     As a type
                                                                                         applications        of PCMsTofor
                                                                                                         is lacking.          the regulation
                                                                                                                            bridge  this gap,
                                of thermal   energy,   hydrated    salts   should  simultaneously      possess   a  suitable
                                herein we provide a comprehensive review of the state-of-the-art development of carbon-        phase  change
                                temperature,
                                enhanced         large latent
                                             hydrated           heat composites,
                                                         salt PCM       storage capacity,
                                                                                      aiminghigh   thermal conductivity,
                                                                                                at highlighting     the designstable   solid–
                                                                                                                                  principles,
                                liquid phasestrategies,
                                fabrication     change behavior
                                                            governing and enhancement
                                                                           cost advantages,    as well as good
                                                                                           mechanisms              physical, chemical
                                                                                                             and application             and
                                                                                                                                  potentials.
                                thermal
                                We        stability
                                    firstly introduce[16,17,31].
                                                         the solid–liquid phase change process and the advantageous features
                                      As listed in Table
                                and shortcomings              1, common
                                                       of hydrated      salts hydrated    salt PCMs
                                                                              for the storage           have melting
                                                                                                 and management         of temperatures
                                                                                                                           thermal energy. in
                                the  range   of  8–120   ◦ C, which is suitable for the storage and management of thermal
                                We then briefly describe how various carbon materials can enhance the thermophysical
                                energy at low-to-medium
                                properties   of hydrated salts  temperature     ranges.
                                                                   and the typical        For example,
                                                                                       methods             the low-temperature
                                                                                                  for fabricating    carbon-enhanced calcium
                                                                                                                                          hy-
                                chloride   hexahydrate     (CaCl    · 6H   O) with  a  melting   point  of 11.2  ◦ C has found important
                                drated salt PCM composites.2 By 2examining representative examples, we discuss how the
                                applications
                                intrinsic      in cold storage
                                           properties             systems
                                                         of various          [32].materials,
                                                                         carbon    Other hydrated
                                                                                              such as salts with a conductivity,
                                                                                                         thermal     melting point surface
                                                                                                                                      around
                                room temperature,
                                chemistry,             such as
                                              morphology,         disodium phosphate
                                                               microstructure      and theirdodecahydrate      (Na2 HPO4 ·aﬀect
                                                                                               loading and dispersion          12H2 O),
                                                                                                                                     thehave
                                                                                                                                         per-
                                formances of the resultant hydrated salt composites, including heat transfer behavior, re-
                                versible solid–liquid phase change stability, anti-leakage, solar–thermal conversion, and
                                additionally aﬀorded functionalities. Regarding the applications of carbon-enhanced hy-
                                drated salt composites, we focus on the thermal management of electronic devices, build-
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                 4 of 28




                               often been used for body heating applications [33]. Moreover, different hydrated salts
                               can be compounded together to form eutectic PCMs and their phase change temperatures
                               can be broadly tuned through altering their chemical compositions [34–36]. The melting
                               points of eutectic hydrated salts are still typically lower than 100 ◦ C, which is limited by the
                               thermal loss of the crystallization water. Hydrated salt PCMs usually have a phase change
                               enthalpy within the range of 100–300 kJ/kg and have a larger volumetric latent heat storage
                               capacity (45–120 kWh/m3 ) than organic PCMs, such as paraffin wax (45–60 kWh/m3 ),
                               due to their larger density. High thermal conductivity is crucial to facilitate effective
                               heat exchange during charging/discharging processes and maintain uniform temperature
                               distribution throughout the storage process [37]. Compared with organic PCMs, that most
                               frequently have a low thermal conductivity of ~0.2 W/(m·K), the thermal conductivity of
                               hydrated salts is generally higher and some of them can be larger than 1 W/(m·K) [38],
                               but this is still not sufficient to achieve fast charging and discharging. Other notable
                               advantages from hydrated salts over organic PCMs include material abundance, cost-
                               effectiveness and inflammability, which are highly desired traits for potential large-scale
                               industrial deployment.

                               Table 1. Thermophysical properties of representative hydrated salt phase change materials.

                                                      Melting     Heat of     Thermal        Specific      Density
                                 Hydrated Salt      Temperature   Fusion    Conductivity    Heat (Solid)   (Solid)          Ref.
                                                       (◦ C)       (J/g)     (W/m·K)         (J/kg·K)      (g/cm3 )
                                 LiClO3 ·3H2 O            8         253                                      1.72       [39,40]
                                   KF·4H2 O              19         231                        1.84          1.45         [41]
                                Mn(NO3 )2 ·6H2 O        25.8       125.9                                      1.6         [42]
                                 CaCl2 ·6H2 O            28         174         1.088          1.42           1.8      [1,39,40]
                                 LiNO3 ·3H2 O            30         256                                                   [43]
                                Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O         32.4        248          0.5                         1.49       [44,45]
                                Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O          33         247         0.45           1.88                     [42,46]
                                                                                                                        [39,42,
                                Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O        35–44       280         0.47            1.7
                                                                                                                           47]
                                Zn(NO3 )2 ·6H2 O          36       149.6                       1.34          1.94         [42]
                                  FeCl3 ·6H2 O            37        223                                                   [48]
                                 CoSO4 ·7H2 O            40.7       170                                                 [40,49]
                                Fe(NO3 )2 ·9H2 O          47        155                                                   [40]
                                Na2 SiO3 ·4H2 O           48        168                                                   [40]
                                K2 HPO4 ·7H2 O            48         99                                                   [40]
                                 MgSO4 ·7H2 O            48.5       202                                                   [42]
                                Na2 S2 O3 ·5H2 O          49        220          0.5                         1.75       [46,50]
                                Ni(NO3 )2 ·6H2 O          57        169                                                   [42]
                                CH3 COONa·3H2 O           58      226–264       1.97                         1.45         [51]
                                 MgCl2 ·4H2 O             58        178                                                   [40]
                                  NaOH·H2 O              64.3       273                                                   [40]
                                Na3 PO4 ·12H2 O         65–69       190                                                   [40]
                                Ba(OH)2 ·8H2 O            78        266         0.65                                      [52]
                                Na4 P2 O7 ·10H2 O        79.5       184         1.82                                      [53]
                                Mg(NO3 )·6H2 O            89        162         1.81                         1.636        [42]
                                Al(NO3 )2 ·8H2 O         89.3       150                                                   [42]
                                Mg(NO3 )·6H2 O           89.9       163         1.81           0.669         1.636        [49]
                                KAl(SO4 )2 ·12H2 O        91        184                                                   [49]
                                NH4 Al(SO4 )2 ·12H2 O     95        269         1.71                         1.65         [42]
                                 MgCl2 ·6H2 O            117        169         0.69                         1.56         [40]


                                    The reversible solid–liquid phase transition enables the storage and release of ther-
                               mal energy. For organic PCMs such as paraffin wax, their phase transition involves a
                               reversible change of the internal molecular arrangement from an ordered crystalline state
                               to a disordered amorphous state when it is over the melting/freezing point. Owing to
                               simple intermolecular interactions during the phase transition processes, organic PCMs
                               often demonstrate congruent melting and solidification, a narrow melting/freezing tem-
                               perature range, and no phase separation over repeated melting/solidification cycles. By
                               comparison, the phase transition process of hydrated salts is much more complex because
                               of the co-existence of electrostatic interaction and hydrogen bonding between salt ions and
                               water molecules and the potential loss/gain of water molecules [54]. Hydrates can undergo
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                            5 of 28




                               partial melting in the charging process, and most frequently show strong supercooling in
                               the discharging process [55–57]. In the melting process, ideally they undergo congruent
                               melting, in which the hydrated salts release all the contained crystallization water and the
                               dehydrated salts fully dissolve in the water, forming an aqueous solution. In many cases,
                               semi-congruent or incongruent melting occurs, meaning that the hydrated salts are not
                               fully dehydrated in the single step and the stoichiometric water is not sufficient to dissolve
                               the dehydrated salts [58,59].
                                    For hydrated salts that undergo two-step melting [54], their melting routes can be
                               described as:
                                                  M p Xq ·nH2 O(s) → M p Xq ·mH2 O(s) + (n − m)H2 O(l )                    (1)


                                           M p Xq ·mH2 O(s) + (n − m)H2 O(l ) → pMq+ ( aq) + qX p− ( aq) + nH2 O(l )                       (2)
                                          One example is that dihydrates form during the melting of Mg(NO3 )2 ·6H2 O and
                                    the undissolved dihydrates or anhydrous salts cause phase separation. The precipitated
                                    salts cannot recombine with water in the subsequent freezing process, which prevents the
                                    release of latent heat (Figure 2). During the melting process, the crystallization water can
                                    be transformed into vapor, especially when the hydrated salts are rapidly and intensively
                                    heated up above their melting points. For example, when sodium acetate trihydrate
                                   (CH3 COONa·3H2 O, SAT), which has a melting point of 58 ◦ C, is heated to 90 ◦ C, it firstly
                                    undergoes a solid–liquid phase change and then experiences a more pronounced heat
                                    absorption involving the further decomposition of the crystallization water [60,61]. This
                                   will cause an obvious loss of water and lead to phase separation, incongruent melting,
                                    and deteriorated storage performances. In addition to chemically bound crystallization
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                   water, hydrated salts can adsorb water from the ambient environment, which adds6more     of 30

                                    complexity to the phase transition process.




                                Figure 2. Schematic showing the congruent and incongruent melting processes
                                                                                                  processes of
                                                                                                            of hydrated
                                                                                                               hydrated salts.
                                                                                                                        salts.

                                       In the freezing process, many hydrated salts suﬀer     suffer from strong supercooling because
                                of the large energy barrier that must be overcome for formation of a stable crystalline
                                structure [62]. For Forinstance,
                                                         instance,SATSATcancanbebecooled
                                                                                   cooleddowndown  toto
                                                                                                      −40 °C ◦without
                                                                                                         −40   C without      crystallization
                                                                                                                          crystallization   oc-
                                occurring.
                                curring. The  The   large
                                                 large      supercooling
                                                        supercooling        degree
                                                                         degree      means
                                                                                  means   that that
                                                                                                 thethe  hydrated
                                                                                                     hydrated    saltsalt  solutions
                                                                                                                       solutions      needed
                                                                                                                                   needed    to
                                to
                                be be   cooled
                                    cooled      down
                                             down     toto  temperaturesmuch
                                                          temperatures       muchlower
                                                                                    lowerthan
                                                                                           thanthethemelting
                                                                                                       meltingpoint
                                                                                                                point before
                                                                                                                        before undergoing
                                crystallization,     which impedes
                                crystallization, which        impedesthe thereleasing
                                                                              releasingofoflatent
                                                                                               latent  heat
                                                                                                    heat  andand  lowers
                                                                                                               lowers     thethe  amount
                                                                                                                              amount         of
                                                                                                                                         of re-
                                releasable   heat
                                leasable heat [63]. [63].
                                       Like
                                       Like other
                                            other PCMs,
                                                     PCMs, salt
                                                              salt hydrates   also have
                                                                   hydrates also   have aa leakage
                                                                                             leakage issue
                                                                                                       issue when
                                                                                                             when they      are melted,
                                                                                                                      they are   melted, and
                                                                                                                                          and
                                the  leaked  salt  solutions   are  highly corrosive   [25].  Meanwhile,    hydrated
                                the leaked salt solutions are highly corrosive [25]. Meanwhile, hydrated salts suﬀer    salts  suffer from  an
                                                                                                                                         from
                                inability  to betoused
                                an inability             for direct
                                                    be used          harvesting
                                                                for direct        of solar-thermal
                                                                            harvesting                or electro-thermal
                                                                                         of solar-thermal                    energy because
                                                                                                              or electro-thermal       energy
                                they   are not  good   solar   absorbers   or good   electrical  conductors
                                because they are not good solar absorbers or good electrical conductors [23]. [23].

                                3. Carbon-Enhancement Strategy
                                3. Carbon-Enhancement Strategy
                                      To overcome the shortcomings of pristine hydrated salt PCMs, including low ther-
                                      To overcome the shortcomings of pristine hydrated salt PCMs, including low thermal
                                mal conductivity, phase separation, supercooling, leakage and poor solar absorptance,
                                conductivity, phase separation, supercooling, leakage and poor solar absorptance, inten-
                                intensive research efforts have been devoted to compounding them with other functional
                                sive research eﬀorts have been devoted to compounding them with other functional fillers
                                [64]. As shown in Figure 3, carbon materials have emerged as a favorite filler because they
                                simultaneously possess high thermal conductivity, high solar absorptance, low density,
                                large specific surface area, tunable surface chemistry and good thermal stability [65]. For
                                instance, 1D CNTs and CFs exhibit exceptional high thermal conductivity properties, with
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                    6 of 28




                                    fillers [64]. As shown in Figure 3, carbon materials have emerged as a favorite filler because
                                    they simultaneously possess high thermal conductivity, high solar absorptance, low den-
                                    sity, large specific surface area, tunable surface chemistry and good thermal stability [65].
                                    For instance, 1D CNTs and CFs exhibit exceptional high thermal conductivity properties,
                                    with axial thermal conductivities of 6600 W/(m·K) and 900 W/(m·K), respectively [66].
                                    Two-dimensional graphene and its derivative have shown high thermal conductivities of
                                    3000–5000 W/(m·K). According to the rule of mixture, after compounding these carbon
                                    fillers, the effective thermal conductivity of the hydrated salt composites should be signifi-
                                    cantly increased at relatively low loading levels. In particular, the heat transfer performance
                                    of the composites should be obviously enhanced if these added carbon fillers can form
                                    connected networks. The large specific surface area of carbon materials, together with their
                                    abundant oxygen-containing surface functional groups, can form strong intermolecular
                                    interactions (hydrogen bonding, van der Waals attraction) with melted hydrated salts. The
                                    capillary adsorption effect and intermolecular attraction forces can not only help confine
                                    and adsorb the melted salts to prevent leakage, but also suppress the loss of crystalline
                                    water, thus mitigating phase separation during repeated phase change processes. During
                                    the solidification process, these carbon fillers can provide numerous heterogeneous nucle-
                                    ation sites to reduce the supercooling of hydrated salts and to facilitate the liquid-to-solid
                                    phase transition and the release of latent heat [67–71]. Three-dimensional carbon, such as
                                    graphite foam, can retain the high thermal conductivity traits of carbon materials, and take
                                    advantage of its porous structure to inhibit phase separation, leakage, and supercooling
                                    issues [17,23]. The rough surface structure and light-trapping feature of 3D carbon materials
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                     7 of 30
                                    further amply solar absorptance and provide the resultant hydrated salt composites with
                                    efficient solar–thermal conversion capability [71–74]. Moreover, different types of carbon
                                    materials and other functional fillers can be hybridized to collaboratively enhance the
                                    enhance    the thermophysical
                                    thermophysical     properties of properties of hydrated
                                                                      hydrated salts        salts
                                                                                     and impart theand impart
                                                                                                    PCMs   withthe PCMs
                                                                                                                other    with other
                                                                                                                      functionalities
                                    functionalities
                                    such as electricalsuch  as electricaland
                                                         conductivity     conductivity and magnetic
                                                                             magnetic responses       responses [27,64].
                                                                                                 [27,64].




                                Figure 3. Preparation of carbon-enhanced PCM composites to overcome the shortcomings of hy-
                                Figure 3. Preparation of carbon-enhanced PCM composites to overcome the shortcomings of hydrated
                                drated salts.
                                salts.
                                      In
                                      In general,
                                         general, the
                                                   the preparation
                                                        preparation routes
                                                                     routes of
                                                                             of carbon-enhanced
                                                                                carbon-enhanced hydrated
                                                                                                      hydrated salt
                                                                                                                salt PCM
                                                                                                                     PCM composites
                                                                                                                           composites
                                can  be  classified  into two categories    (Figure    4), although   various  approaches
                                can be classified into two categories (Figure 4), although various approaches and techniques and tech-
                                niques
                                had been hadinvestigated.
                                             been investigated.
                                                             The The
                                                                  firstfirst
                                                                        typetype   is the
                                                                               is the      carbonadditive
                                                                                        carbon     additivemethod,
                                                                                                            method, which
                                                                                                                      which typically
                                                                                                                              typically
                                involves   the direct  physical blending    of hydrated     salts with  carbon
                                involves the direct physical blending of hydrated salts with carbon materials.  materials.  In the
                                                                                                                                 Infab-
                                                                                                                                    the
                                rication  process,  carbon  materials  are mixed    with    melted  hydrated  salts or solid
                                fabrication process, carbon materials are mixed with melted hydrated salts or solid hydrated hydrated
                                salt
                                salt powders    throughphysical
                                     powders through      physicalblending,
                                                                    blending,meltmeltblending
                                                                                        blending oror solution
                                                                                                    solution   evaporation
                                                                                                             evaporation      prepara-
                                                                                                                           preparation
                                tion methods together with other facilitating techniques such as mechanical mixing, mag-
                                netic stirring, ultrasonic dispersing or super-probe dispersing. In these cases, various car-
                                bon fillers with a relatively low loading are dispersed within hydrated salts. The obtained
                                composites largely retain the original latent heat storage capacity and processability of the
                                hydrated salts and have cost advantages due to the low loading requirement.
 Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                     7 of 28




                                     methods together with other facilitating techniques such as mechanical mixing, magnetic
                                     stirring, ultrasonic dispersing or super-probe dispersing. In these cases, various carbon
                                     fillers with a relatively low loading are dispersed within hydrated salts. The obtained
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                 8 of 30
                                     composites largely retain the original latent heat storage capacity and processability of the
                                     hydrated salts and have cost advantages due to the low loading requirement.




                                            Routesfor
                                 Figure4.4.Routes
                                Figure              forpreparing
                                                        preparingcarbon-enhanced
                                                                  carbon-enhancedhydrated
                                                                                  hydratedsalt
                                                                                           saltPCM
                                                                                                PCMcomposites:
                                                                                                    composites:carbon
                                                                                                                carbonadditive
                                                                                                                       additive
                                 methodand
                                method    andcarbon
                                              carbonskeleton
                                                       skeletonmethod.
                                                                method.

                                       The second type,
                                4. Carbon-Enhanced        summarized
                                                       Hydrated         as the
                                                                  Salt PCM     carbon skeleton route, involves loading the
                                                                            Composites
                                  molten hydrated salts into 3D carbon skeletons through direct impregnation or vacuum
                                      Diverse carbon materials have been investigated to improve the overall performance
                                  impregnation or compounding solid hydrated salt powders with carbon materials through
                                of hydrated salts, including their thermal conductivity, supercooling behavior, anti-leak-
                                  compression molding processes. In these cases, porous graphite foam, activated carbon and
                                age capability, cycling stability and photothermal conversion. Each carbon material has
                                  biochar can directly adsorb melted hydrated salts, or compression-molded EG sheets with
                                shown distinct enhancement eﬀects and mechanisms due to its unique features and ther-
                                  high loadings can form connected networks to encapsulate hydrated salts. In comparison,
                                mophysical properties. Herein, we provide representative examples to introduce how 1D,
                                  the interconnected skeletons are more effective in improving the thermophysical properties
                                2D, 3D and hybrid carbon materials enhance the thermophysical properties and applica-
                                  of hydrated salts than the sparsely distributed carbon fillers, but the carbon loading is
                                tion performances of hydrate salt PCMs.
                                  higher and the fabrication process is more complicated for the skeleton method.
                                4.1. Hydrated Salt–CNT Hydrated
                                  4. Carbon-Enhanced         CompositesSalt PCM Composites
                                      CNTs    are carbon
                                        Diverse   tubularmaterials
                                                            structures    formed
                                                                       have  beenby  carbon atoms
                                                                                  investigated       arrangedthe
                                                                                                 to improve     in overall
                                                                                                                   a hexagonal   lattice
                                                                                                                           performance
                                similar   to thatsalts,
                                  of hydrated      of aincluding
                                                         graphite their
                                                                    sheet,thermal
                                                                            possessing  high strength,
                                                                                   conductivity,         electrical
                                                                                                  supercooling       conductivity
                                                                                                                 behavior,          and
                                                                                                                            anti-leakage
                                thermal    conductivity.    Based    on  the arrangement   of  carbon  atoms   in  the tubular
                                  capability, cycling stability and photothermal conversion. Each carbon material has shown     lattice,
                                CNTs     canenhancement
                                  distinct   be classified effects
                                                              into single-walled
                                                                      and mechanismscarbon
                                                                                         duenanotubes    (SWCNTs),
                                                                                             to its unique             consisting
                                                                                                            features and           of a
                                                                                                                           thermophys-
                                single   layer of graphene
                                  ical properties.    Herein,rolled     into a representative
                                                                we provide     seamless cylinder    and multi-walled
                                                                                                examples   to introduce carbon
                                                                                                                           how 1D,nano-
                                                                                                                                      2D,
                                tubes
                                  3D and(MWCNTs)       consisting
                                            hybrid carbon           of multiple
                                                              materials          concentric
                                                                           enhance           cylinders of properties
                                                                                    the thermophysical     graphene [75].
                                                                                                                       and The   abun-
                                                                                                                            application
                                dant   delocalized
                                  performances     ofπhydrate
                                                        electronssalton the surface of CNTs can interact with PCMs through in-
                                                                      PCMs.
                                termolecular forces or chemical bonding, thereby modulating the properties of these ma-
                                terials [76]. With the rapid development of synthesis techniques, such as chemical vapor
                                deposition (CVD), arc discharge and laser ablation, the cost of CNTs, especially MWCNTs,
                                has witnessed a significant drop and can be comparable to the price of some carbon blacks
                                [77]. The control of the loading, dispersion state and quality of CNTs in terms of their high
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                          8 of 28




                               4.1. Hydrated Salt–CNT Composites
                                     CNTs are tubular structures formed by carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice
                               similar to that of a graphite sheet, possessing high strength, electrical conductivity and
                               thermal conductivity. Based on the arrangement of carbon atoms in the tubular lattice, CNTs
                               can be classified into single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), consisting of a single layer
                               of graphene rolled into a seamless cylinder and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)
                               consisting of multiple concentric cylinders of graphene [75]. The abundant delocalized π
                               electrons on the surface of CNTs can interact with PCMs through intermolecular forces
                               or chemical bonding, thereby modulating the properties of these materials [76]. With the
                               rapid development of synthesis techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),
                               arc discharge and laser ablation, the cost of CNTs, especially MWCNTs, has witnessed
                               a significant drop and can be comparable to the price of some carbon blacks [77]. The
                               control of the loading, dispersion state and quality of CNTs in terms of their high aspect
                               ratio, orientation and surface chemistry is critical for optimizing the enhancement of
                               thermophysical properties of hydrated salts.
                                     By employing various commercial carbon materials as the filler, Kumar et al. [78]
                               investigated the influence of the size and shape of carbon materials on the thermal conduc-
                               tivity enhancement of Mg(NO3 )2 ·6H2 O (Magnesium nitrate hexahydrate, MNH) through
                               mixing carbon spheres, MWCNTs, mesoporous carbon, graphene nanosheets, and nano-
                               graphite with the hydrated salts with the same loading of 0.5 wt%, each. The thermal
                               conductivity of the CNT composites was increased by 82.5%, which was higher than the
                               composites loaded with mesoporous carbon (75%), graphene nanosheets (72.5%) and nano-
                               graphite (65%) (Figure 5a). Although CNTs have a high intrinsic thermal conductivity and
                               a large aspect ratio, they found that carbon spheres had stronger enhancement of thermal
                               conductivity (100%) due to their better dispersion and formation of percolated networks.
                               In a recent work, Zeng et al. [79] reported that after hydrophilic treatment, MWCNTs
                               could be uniformly dispersed within the eutectic salt of sodium acetate trihydrate/sodium
                               monohydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate with a mass ratio of 9:1 (Figure 5b). The thermal
                               conductivity of the composites linearly increased with the loading of MWCNTs and reached
                               1.29 W/m K with 8 wt% of MWCNTs.
                                     Jia’s group [80] developed a CVD method and successfully synthesized aligned CNTs
                               (a-CNTs) by using propylene as the carbon source (Figure 5c), which decomposed on
                               vermiculite-supported catalysts in a fluidized bed reactor. Compared with randomly disor-
                               dered CNTs (r-CNTs), they reported that these a-CNTs have shown stronger enhancement
                               of the thermophysical properties of organic PCMs. In a recent work [81], they directly
                               blended 5 wt% of a-CNTs with a length of 100 µm and 1 wt% of sodium carboxymethyl
                               cellulose (SCMC) thickening agents to improve the thermal storage performance of binary
                               hydrated salts of Al2 (SO4 )3 ·18H2 O/FeSO4 ·7H2 O with a mass ratio of 2:1 (Figure 5d). They
                               found that the a-CNTs established a network within the composites, which achieved a
                               thermal conductivity of 3.23 W/(m·K) at room temperature. With increasing temperature,
                               the thermal conductivity slightly decreased due to intensified lattice vibration, but it fur-
                               ther rose when the temperature reached 200 ◦ C, which has been attributed to enhanced
                               connectivity between the CNTs after the melting of the cellulose binder. Meanwhile, the
                               CNTs provide a resilient network restraining the volume change of the hydrate salt PCMs
                               during the heat release and absorption processes, thereby enhancing the cycling stability
                               and maintaining a high heat-releasing temperature of 118.43 ◦ C and a large energy storage
                               density of 420.4 J/g after 100 cycles.
                                     In an SAT composite, Sun et al. [82] reported that the addition of 4 wt% of urea could
                               inhibit phase segregation, and 4 wt% of disodium hydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate
                               (Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O, DHPD) nucleation agents could reduce the supercooling degree to
                               0.6 ◦ C. To improve thermal conductivity and prevent leakage, they compounded the PCMs
                               with mixed EG and CNTs. Interestingly, they found that the addition of 2 wt% of CNTs
                               could further increase the thermal conductivity of the composites from 6.141 W/(m·K) to
                               than the composites loaded with mesoporous carbon (75%), graphene nanosheets (72.5%)
                               and nano-graphite (65%) (Figure 5a). Although CNTs have a high intrinsic thermal con-
                               ductivity and a large aspect ratio, they found that carbon spheres had stronger enhance-
                               ment of thermal conductivity (100%) due to their better dispersion and formation of per-
                               colated networks. In a recent work, Zeng et al. [79] reported that after hydrophilic treat-
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                          9 of 28
                               ment, MWCNTs could be uniformly dispersed within the eutectic salt of sodium acetate
                               trihydrate/sodium monohydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate with a mass ratio of 9:1 (Fig-
                               ure 5b). The thermal conductivity of the composites linearly increased with the loading of
                                7.178 W/(m
                               MWCNTs     and·K) because
                                               reached   they
                                                       1.29   filled
                                                            W/m      the gaps
                                                                  K with      between
                                                                          8 wt%        the hydrated salts and the pores of
                                                                                of MWCNTs.
                                the EG.




                                             (a)Comparison
                                 Figure5.5.(a)
                               Figure            Comparisonofofthermal
                                                                thermal conductivity
                                                                          conductivity enhancement
                                                                                         enhancement of  ofmagnesium
                                                                                                            magnesiumnitratenitratehexahydrate
                                                                                                                                    hexahydrateby
                               by  carbon
                                 carbon      spheres,
                                         spheres,     MWCNTs,
                                                    MWCNTs,       mesoporous
                                                               mesoporous       carbon,
                                                                              carbon,     graphene
                                                                                        graphene      nanoplatelets
                                                                                                   nanoplatelets    andand  nano
                                                                                                                         nano      graphite
                                                                                                                                graphite      with
                                                                                                                                           with  the
                               the  same    loading  of 0.5 wt%   (Figure  5a reprinted/adapted      with  permission     from   Ref.
                                 same loading of 0.5 wt% (Figure 5a reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [78]. 2021, Elsevier   [78]. 2021,
                               Elsevier
                                 Ltd.) (b)Ltd.)
                                            SEM(b)  SEMshowing
                                                  image  image showing
                                                                  uniformuniform
                                                                            dispersiondispersion  of hydrophilic
                                                                                         of hydrophilic  CNTs withinCNTs    withinsalts
                                                                                                                         eutectic   eutectic  salts
                                                                                                                                         of sodium
                               of sodium acetate trihydrate/sodium monohydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate (Figure 5b re-
                                 acetate trihydrate/sodium monohydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate (Figure 5b reprinted/adapted
                               printed/adapted with permission from Ref. [79]. 2021, Elsevier Ltd.) (c) Schematic route for synthe-
                                with permission from Ref. [79]. 2021, Elsevier Ltd.) (c) Schematic route for synthesizing aligned CNTs
                               sizing aligned CNTs (a−CNTs) and a representative SEM image of a−CNT (Figure 5c re-
                                (a-CNTs) and a representative
                               printed/adapted      with permission SEM   image
                                                                       from  Ref.of[80].
                                                                                     a-CNT   (Figure
                                                                                         2019,        5c reprinted/adapted
                                                                                                Elsevier                         with permission
                                                                                                          Ltd.) (d) Binary hydrated       salts of
                               Alfrom  Ref. [80]. 2019, Elsevier Ltd.) (d) Binary hydrated salts of Al2 (SOby
                                  2(SO4)3·18H2O/FeSO4·7H2O with a mass ratio of 2:1 enhanced                    4 )3 ·18H 2 O/FeSO
                                                                                                                      a−CNTs         4 ·7H5d
                                                                                                                                 (Figure   2 O with
                                                                                                                                                re-
                                 a mass ratio of 2:1
                               printed/adapted        enhanced
                                                    with         by a-CNTs
                                                         permission          (Figure
                                                                      from Ref.  [81].5d  reprinted/adapted
                                                                                       2021,                   with permission
                                                                                              the American Chemical       Society).from Ref. [81].
                                 2021, the American Chemical Society).
                                    Jia’s group [80] developed a CVD method and successfully synthesized aligned CNTs
                                      In addition to the enhancement of thermal conductivity, Ding et al. [83] reported
                               (a-CNTs) by using propylene as the carbon source (Figure 5c), which decomposed on ver-
                                that MWCNTs together with SCMC altered the phase change temperature and the fusion
                               miculite-supported catalysts in a fluidized bed reactor. Compared with randomly
                                enthalpy of DHPD. In contrast to pure DHPD, which exhibited two melting peaks at
                                33.42 ◦ C and 45.85 ◦ C, the DHPD–SCMC–MWCNT composites effectively suppressed the
                                phase separation of DHPD and the formation of low-grade salt Na2 HPO4 ·7H2 O, showed a
                                single melting peak, and increased the latent heat enthalpy by 36.19%.

                                4.2. Hydrated Salt–CF Composites
                                     CF is a material composed of thin, strong crystalline filaments of carbon atoms bonded
                                together in a microcrystalline structure. CF is known for its exceptional strength-to-weight
                                ratio, low density, corrosion resistance and good thermal conductivity. Previously, CFs have
                                found important applications in the aerospace, automotive and construction industries,
                                mainly for enhancing mechanical properties. In recent years, attempts also have been made
                                to incorporate CFs within hydrated salts to improve thermal storage performance [26].
                                     Aiming to improve the thermal properties of DHPD and eliminate phase separation
                                and supercooling, Tang et al. [84] prepared PCM composites with optimized loadings of
                                functional fillers (4 wt% of Na2 SiO3 9H2 O, 4 wt% of CMC, 12 wt% of surface-modified AlN
                                and 6 wt% of short-cut CFs) through simple mechanical mixing and vacuum adsorption. In
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                           10 of 28




                                   this case, Na2 SiO3 9H2 O and surface-modified AlN synergistically inhibit the supercooling
                                   of DHPD. Both the surface-modified AlN and short-cut CFs increased the effective thermal
                                   conductivity of DHPD hydrated salts due to their intrinsic high thermal conductivity. It
                                   was found that 8 wt% of short-cut CFs further improved the thermal conductivity of the
                                   composites (PCM-12) at 35 ◦ C from 1.4 W/(m·K) to 1.91 W/(m·K) (Figure 6a). Another
                                   advantage from the added CFs was that they provided sufficient capillary confinement to
                                   fully eliminate leakage of melted DHPD. In addition to thermal properties, the influence of
                                   added carbon fillers on the electrical properties needs to considered if the composites are
                                   targeted for the thermal management of electronic devices and systems such as batteries.
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                       11 of 30
                                   Unlike surface-modified AlN, CFs are electrically conductive and can form conductive
                                   networks within hydrated salts at relative low loadings due to their large aspect ratio.
                                   Under applied voltages varying from 5 V to 30 V, the electrical resistance of the composites
                                    the composites
                                   decreased   with decreased
                                                     increasing with increasing
                                                                loading  of CFs. loading   of CFs.
                                                                                  In this case, an In this case,loading
                                                                                                   optimum        an optimum   loading
                                                                                                                         of 6 wt%  was
                                    of 6 wt%  was  selected to balance the overall  thermophysical     properties
                                   selected to balance the overall thermophysical properties of the composites.     of the composites.




                                 Figure  6. (a)
                                 Figure 6.   (a)Improving
                                                 Improvingthermal
                                                             thermalconductivity
                                                                      conductivityand
                                                                                    anddecreasing
                                                                                        decreasingelectrical
                                                                                                   electricalresistance
                                                                                                              resistanceofofNa
                                                                                                                             Na2 SiO
                                                                                                                                 2SiO3 ·39H
                                                                                                                                         ·9H22O
                                                                                                                                              O
                                 composites with
                                 composites     with short-cut
                                                      short-cutCFs
                                                                 CFs(Figure
                                                                      (Figure6a6a
                                                                                reprinted/adapted withwith
                                                                                  reprinted/adapted      permission   fromfrom
                                                                                                              permission    Ref. [84].
                                                                                                                                   Ref. 2022,
                                                                                                                                           [84].
                                 Wiley-VCH
                                 2022,  Wiley-VCHGmbH).    (b) GO–CF
                                                       GmbH).    (b) GO–CFaerogel  loaded
                                                                               aerogel     with with
                                                                                        loaded   eutectic  saltssalts
                                                                                                      eutectic         of 2SO
                                                                                                                   of Na   Na42·10H   O and
                                                                                                                                SO4 ·210H   2O
                                 Na 2CO3·10H2O to increase thermal conductivity and reduce supercooling (Figure 6b re-
                                 and Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O to increase thermal conductivity and reduce supercooling (Figure 6b
                                 printed/adapted with permission from Ref. [85]. 2022, Springer Nature).
                                 reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [85]. 2022, Springer Nature).

                                       To take
                                       To   take advantage
                                                  advantageof ofthethe
                                                                    notable mechanical
                                                                        notable         enhancement
                                                                                 mechanical             eﬀect from
                                                                                               enhancement      effectCFs,  Wang
                                                                                                                         from     et
                                                                                                                               CFs,
                                 al. [85] prepared   lightweight  carbon  aerogel through  mixing  and  directional  freeze-drying
                                 Wang et al. [85] prepared lightweight carbon aerogel through mixing and directional freeze-
                                 of GO, of
                                 drying   SCMC     and CFs
                                              GO, SCMC    andfollowed   by carbonization
                                                                CFs followed              at relatively
                                                                              by carbonization           low temperatures.
                                                                                                 at relatively                 They
                                                                                                               low temperatures.
                                 emphasized      that added   CFs  provided  structural support   for the  aerogel
                                 They emphasized that added CFs provided structural support for the aerogel and de- and   decreased
                                 the volume
                                 creased       shrinkage
                                           the volume      of the skeleton.
                                                         shrinkage          The obtained
                                                                    of the skeleton.  Thehydrophilic   aerogel with
                                                                                          obtained hydrophilic         a porosity
                                                                                                                   aerogel   with of
                                                                                                                                  a
                                 96.9% was loaded with eutectic salts of Na2SO4·10H2O and Na2CO3·10H2O with a mass
                                 ratio of 9:1 through melt mixing and vacuum impregnation (Figure 6b). The aerogel
                                 helped increase the thermal conductivity of the eutectic salts from 0.544 W/(m·K) to 1.756
                                 W/(m·K), and reduce the supercooling degree from 1.2 °C to 0.7 °C. The enhanced thermal
                                 conductivity and reduced supercooling were attributed to the light-weight hydrophilic
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                           11 of 28




                               porosity of 96.9% was loaded with eutectic salts of Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O and Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O
                               with a mass ratio of 9:1 through melt mixing and vacuum impregnation (Figure 6b). The
                               aerogel helped increase the thermal conductivity of the eutectic salts from 0.544 W/(m·K)
                               to 1.756 W/(m·K), and reduce the supercooling degree from 1.2 ◦ C to 0.7 ◦ C. The enhanced
                               thermal conductivity and reduced supercooling were attributed to the light-weight hy-
                               drophilic carbon hydrogel networks. In particular, the low-temperature carbonization
                               process avoided the full loss of hydrophilic functional groups from GO surfaces, such that
                               the aerogel networks maintained good compatibility with the hydrated salts and served as
                               favorable heterogeneous nucleating centers during the solidification process.

                               4.3. Hydrated Salt–GO Composites
                                     Two-dimensional layered carbon, including graphene and its derivatives such as GO
                               and rGO, are extensively utilized for improving the thermal conductivity, phase transition
                               behavior, stability and solar absorptance of hydrated salt PCMs due to their intrinsic high
                               thermal conductivity, large specific surface area, excellent photothermal conversion capa-
                               bility and rich surface functional groups [75]. Among them, GO can be readily fabricated
                               through exfoliation and oxidization of graphite by Hummer’s method at low cost. Various
                               methods have been developed to transform GO into rGO and graphene, which have higher
                               thermal conductivity and stronger photothermal conversion capability [86].
                                     As shown in Figure 7a, Li et al. [67] reported that the addition of GO could reduce the
                               contact angle between melted DHPD and the porous expanded vermiculite (EV) skeleton
                               from 56◦ to 45◦ due to the abundance of hydrophilic carboxyl, hydroxyl and epoxy groups
                               on GO sheets. It was found that these functional groups could form hydrogen bonding
                               with crystallization water in hydrated salts, thus preventing the loss of crystallization water
                               and increasing the amount of encapsulated PCMs inside the EV. As a result, the latent heat
                               increased from 167 J/g for the DHPD/EV composites to 229 J/g for the DHPD–GO/EV
                               composites loaded with 0.2 w% of GO. They also noticed that the hydrated salts within
                               DHPD/EV composites were composed of Na2 HPO4 ·2H2 O and Na2 HPO4 ·7H2 O because
                               of the loss of crystallization water. By contrast, the main components of the hydrated salts
                               within the DHPD–GO/EV composites were Na2 HPO4 ·7H2 O and Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O, owing
                               to the water retained by the GO sheets. The formation of hydrogen bonds between salt
                               hydrates and GO also promoted thermal stability, and it took higher temperatures than for
                               the pristine hydrated salts to induce a loss of crystallization water from the composites.
                                     As shown in Figure 7b, Yang’s team [69] prepared a GO-modified poly(acrylamide-
                               co-acrylic acid) copolymer (PAAAM) hydrogel to improve the thermophysical properties
                               of eutectic hydrated salts (EHS, mixture of Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O and Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O with a
                               mass ratio of 2:3). Although the hydrophilic hydrogel network could suppress the leakage
                               of melted hydrated salts, the melting enthalpy dropped from 220.2 J/g for the EHS to
                               189.1 J/g for the PAAAM–EHS composites. Interestingly, it was found that the melting
                               enthalpy of GO–EHS/PAAAM increased to 200.3 J/g, which was ascribed to the weakened
                               electrostatic interaction between PAAAM and EHS by the GO nanosheets. At the same time,
                               the GO–EHS/PAAAM composites showed the lowest supercooling degrees because the
                               hydrophilic GO nanosheets provided numerous favorable heterogeneous nucleation sites
                               to lower the nucleation energy barrier. As a result, the crystallization enthalpy increased
                               from 147.1 J/g for EHS/PAAAM to 160.6 J/g for GO–EHS/PAAAM composites. They also
                               observed an obvious enhancement of thermal conductivity when the GO content exceeded
                               0.5 wt%, such that the GO sheets could form heat transfer networks, and they achieved a
                               54% increase in thermal conductivity with addition of 2 wt% GO.
                               salts within DHPD/EV composites were composed of Na2HPO4·2H2O and Na2HPO4·7H2O
                               because of the loss of crystallization water. By contrast, the main components of the hy-
                               drated salts within the DHPD–GO/EV composites were Na2HPO4·7H2O and
                               Na2HPO4·12H2O, owing to the water retained by the GO sheets. The formation of hydro-
                               gen bonds between salt hydrates and GO also promoted thermal stability, and it took
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                         12 of 28
                               higher temperatures than for the pristine hydrated salts to induce a loss of crystallization
                               water from the composites.




                               Figure 7.
                               Figure  7. (a)
                                           (a)Addition
                                               AdditionofofGO  GOenables
                                                                    enablesa reduction
                                                                              a reductionin in
                                                                                            thethe
                                                                                                 contact angle
                                                                                                    contact     between
                                                                                                            angle  betweenmelted  DHPD
                                                                                                                             melted      and
                                                                                                                                      DHPD
                               the porous expanded vermiculite skeleton from 56° to ◦45° (Figure            7a reprinted/adapted   with  per-
                               and the porous expanded vermiculite skeleton from 56 to 45◦ (Figure 7a reprinted/adapted with
                               mission from Ref. [67]. 2020, the American Chemical Society). (b) Improving thermophysical prop-
                               permission from Ref. [67]. 2020, the American Chemical Society). (b) Improving thermophysical
                               erties of eutectic hydrated salts by a GO-modified poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) copolymer
                               properties
                               (PAAAM) of     eutectic(Figure
                                           hydrogel     hydrated7b salts  by a GO-modified
                                                                   reprinted/adapted     withpoly(acrylamide-co-acrylic     acid) Royal
                                                                                               permission from Ref. [69]. 2016,   copolymer
                                                                                                                                        Soci-
                               (PAAAM)     hydrogel    (Figure   7b  reprinted/adapted     with   permission   from  Ref.
                               ety of Chemistry). (c) Impregnation of SAT within super-hydrophilic rGO aerogels modified  [69].  2016, Royal
                                                                                                                                           by
                               Society of Chemistry).(Figure
                               konjac glucomannan         (c) Impregnation     of SAT within
                                                                 7c reprinted/adapted           super-hydrophilic
                                                                                          with permission           rGO
                                                                                                            from Ref.     aerogels
                                                                                                                      [87].        modified
                                                                                                                            2022, the Ameri-
                               cankonjac
                               by   Chemical   Society). (d)(Figure
                                           glucomannan        Shape-stabilized    solar-thermal
                                                                      7c reprinted/adapted        storage
                                                                                               with       SAT composites
                                                                                                      permission  from Ref.enhanced    by the
                                                                                                                             [87]. 2022,  hy-
                               drophilic  GNPs   and   sodium    phosphate     monobasic   monohydrate     nucleating agents
                               American Chemical Society). (d) Shape-stabilized solar-thermal storage SAT composites enhanced  (Figure 7d  re-
                               printed/adapted    with   permission    from  Ref. [88]. 2021, Elsevier).
                               by hydrophilic GNPs and sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate nucleating agents (Figure 7d
                               reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [88]. 2021, Elsevier).

                                    As shown in Figure 7c, Yu’s group [87] reported the fabrication of super-hydrophilic
                               rGO aerogels modified by konjac glucomannan (KGM) through a hydrothermal reaction-
                               freeze-drying process and impregnation of SAT within the skeleton. Owing to the abundant
                               oxygen-containing functional groups in the KGM and rGO surfaces, the aerogels demon-
                               strated excellent wettability with the melted SAT and could effectively prevent the leakage
                               of melted hydrated salts. One notable observation is that unlike conventional fragile rGO
                               aerogels, the KGM-modified aerogels were elastic and could quickly recover to their origi-
                               nal state after releasing the applied compression force. The hydrophilic surface treatment
                               also helped increasing the latent heat storage density from 231.6 J/g for the SAT/rGO com-
                               posites to 252.8 J/g. The aerogel-encapsulated SAT composites enabled direct solar–thermal
                               conversion and accelerated charging and discharging processes.
                                    Although graphene sheets have a high thermal conductivity of 2600 to 5300 W/(m·K)
                               and full-band absorptance of sunlight, they typically have poor miscibility with hydrated
                               salts due to their lack of hydrophilic surface functional groups [89]. To address this
                               shortcoming, Mehrali and coworkers [88] treated graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) with 1-
                               pyrenecarboxylic acid in an ethanol solution and blended the obtain hydrophilic GNPs with
                               SAT and sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate (SPM) nucleating agents (Figure 7d).
                               The carboxylic acid groups on the surfaces of the GNPs could form hydrogen bonds with the
                               water molecules in the hydrated salts and restrict the movement of water. Such hydrogen
                               bonding, together with the large specific surface area of the GNPs, created a barrier against
                               phase separation and liquid leakage. They reported that the hydrophilic GNPs reduced
                               the supercooling degree of SAT and achieved similar values as the SPM nucleating agents.
                               With 5 wt% of GNPs, the thermal conductivity was increased by 114%, and the composites
                               achieved a high photothermal conversion efficiency of 92.6%.
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                                  13 of 28




                                   4.4. Hydrated Salt–EG Composites
                                              Three-dimensional carbon materials can provide interconnected thermal networks
                                       to reduce the thermal resistance between carbon fillers; thus, more effective enhancement
                                       of the thermal conductivity of hydrated salts is expected [90]. Accelerated heat transfer
                                       throughout the composites enables efficient storage and release of thermal energy in the
                                       charging and discharging processes, respectively. On the other hand, the large surface area
                                       of the porous skeletons provides more nucleation sites to lower the supercooling degree
                                       and effectively confine melted hydrated salts to prepare form-stable composites.
                                              Despite EG having a much higher thermal conductivity than GO sheets, its surface is
                                       typically hydrophobic due to the lack of oxygen-containing functional groups, and it has
                                       poor wettability with hydrated salts. By modifying EG with an Al2 O3 layer (4.4 wt%) by
                                       heterogeneous nucleation and a subsequent heat treatment process, Zhang’s group [91]
    Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                  14 of 30
                                       reported that the water contact could be reduced from 90.7◦ to 33.9◦ (Figure 8a). Alterna-
                                       tively, they demonstrated that modifying EG with an organic surfactant (trtonX-100) could
                                       also create hydrophilic surfaces, which are critical to achieve a large adsorption capacity of
                                        could also create hydrophilic surfaces, which are critical to achieve a large adsorption ca-
                                       hydrated salts. They found that 1:10 was an optimum mass ratio of TriotonX-100 to EG for
                                        pacity of hydrated salts. They found that 1:10 was an optimum mass ratio of TriotonX-100
                                       achieving    the highest adsorption capacity of MgCl ·6H O-NH4 Al(SO
                                        to EG for achieving the highest adsorption capacity of 2MgCl22·6H2O-NH          4 )2 ·12H2 O eutectic
                                                                                                                    4Al(SO4)2·12H2O
                                       salt
                                        eutectic salt hydrates (81.9%). Compared with eutectic salt hydrates, the thermalconductivity
                                             hydrates  (81.9%).  Compared    with  eutectic  salt hydrates, the  thermal      conduc-       was
                                       increased   by  10 times, reaching  4.789 W/(m   · K), and  the composites   demonstrated
                                        tivity was increased by 10 times, reaching 4.789 W/(m·K), and the composites demon-            excellent
                                       form-stability   and
                                        strated excellent    thermal reliability.
                                                          form-stability and thermal reliability.




                                    Figure 8.
                                           8. (a)
                                               (a)Coating
                                                   CoatingEGEGwith anan
                                                                with  Al2Al
                                                                         O3 layer to achieve surface hydrophilicity and improve wetting
                                   Figure                                  2 O3 layer to achieve surface hydrophilicity and improve wetting
                                    with hydrated salts (Figure 8a reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [91]. 2018, Elsevier). (b)
                                   with  hydrated
                                    Reducing         salts (Figure
                                                supercooling        8a reprinted/adapted
                                                             and increasing                   with of
                                                                             thermal conductivity  permission     from Ref.
                                                                                                      eutectic hydrated   salts[91].
                                                                                                                                 by EG2018,
                                                                                                                                        net- Elsevier).
                                   (b) Reducing
                                    works (Figuresupercooling    and increasing
                                                    8b reprinted/adapted         thermal conductivity
                                                                         with permission                of2021).
                                                                                           from Ref. [92]. eutectic
                                                                                                                 (c) hydrated
                                                                                                                     EG networkssaltsprovide
                                                                                                                                      by EG networks
                                    hydrated salts with an eﬀective heat transfer path to conduct released latent heat in a timely manner
                                    and suppress recalescence during solidification (Figure 8c reprinted/adapted with permission from
                                    Ref. [93]. 2020, Elsevier).

                                        As shown in Figure 8b, Li et al. [92] transformed expandable graphite into EG
                                    through high-temperature treatment at 800 °C and impregnated the eutectic hydrated
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                 14 of 28




                               (Figure 8b reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [92]. 2021). (c) EG networks provide
                               hydrated salts with an effective heat transfer path to conduct released latent heat in a timely manner
                               and suppress recalescence during solidification (Figure 8c reprinted/adapted with permission from
                               Ref. [93]. 2020, Elsevier).

                                     As shown in Figure 8b, Li et al. [92] transformed expandable graphite into EG through
                               high-temperature treatment at 800 ◦ C and impregnated the eutectic hydrated salts of
                               sodium carbonate decahydrate (Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O, SCD) and SDPD to prepare form-stable
                               composites. The EG network helped decrease the supercooling degree of the eutectic hy-
                               drated salts from 5.7 ◦ C to 0.8 ◦ C and increase the thermal conductivity from 0.82 W/(m·K)
                               to 2.74 W/(m·K). They demonstrated that such EG-impregnated composites had excellent
                               thermal insulation effect and held the potential to serve as advanced building materials. In
                               another work, Fu et al. [94] utilized EG as the supporting material, employed glycine as the
                               temperature regulator and prepared SAT composites through a melted mixing approach.
                               With 12 wt% of EG, the hydrated salt composites showed no leakage after melting, a suit-
                               able phase change temperature of 47.14 ◦ C, a phase change enthalpy higher than 200 J/g, a
                               low supercooling degree of 1.49 ◦ C and a high thermal conductivity of 6.4 W/(m·K). They
                               demonstrated that such a composite held the potential for floor radiant heating.
                                     Li et al. [93] highlighted the influence of EG on the phase change behavior of sodium
                               sulfate decahydrate (SSD, Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O), which suffers from shortcomings such as super-
                               cooling, phase separation, low thermal conductivity and recalescence. They found that the
                               addition of CMC, borax decahydrate and OP-10 could effectively suppress supercooling
                               and phase separation (Figure 8c), but the DSC curves of the resultant composites showed
                               drastic recalescence in the freezing process. After impregnating the mixture salts within the
                               pores of EG, the recalescence disappeared as the EG provided an effective heat transfer path
                               to conduct the released latent heat in a timely manner. Experimentally, they observed that
                               the thermal conductivity of the EG composites reached 1.96 W/(m·K), which was 2.6 times
                               higher than the mixed hydrated salts. Benefiting from the increased thermal conductivity
                               compared with neat SSD, the heating and cooling time of the composites impregnated
                               within EG were shortened by 36.2% and 44.5%, respectively.

                               4.5. Hydrated Salt–Biochar Composites
                                    Biomass char, a unique carbon material derived from the organic matter of plants,
                               animals, and microorganisms through carbonization, possesses low-cost advantages over
                               other carbon materials. Raw materials for producing biochar are diverse and include
                               agricultural waste such as straw, corn stalks, and husks, as well as fruit, forestry residues
                               such wood chips, sawdust, livestock manure such as animal waste from cows, and organic
                               components of municipal solid waste [95]. Biomass char retains the original morphology
                               and structure of its raw materials, featuring numerous pores and abundance of oxygen-
                               containing groups. After carbonization, it exhibits enhanced thermal conductivity and
                               elevated solar absorptance. Abundant, low-cost biochar provides a facile, economical and
                               environmentally friendly supporting material to enhance the thermophysical properties of
                               hydrated salts.
                                    By using bagasse as the raw material, Wang et al. [96] prepared biomass-derived
                               carbon-encapsulated shape-stabilized sodium sulfate decahydrate (SSD) composites. As
                               shown in Figure 9a, the biochar was obtained through pressing fresh sugarcanes into
                               bagasse and drying the bagasse at 150 ◦ C before final carbonization at 500 ◦ C for 1 h
                               under a purge of N2 gas. The bagasse biochar (BBC) possesses a low density, a large
                               specific surface area and numerous pores with a diameter around 10 nm, and thus could be
                               used as the carbon supporting material to adsorb melted SSD. With 9 wt% of biochar, the
                               SSD–BBC composites demonstrated a latent heat storage capacity of 161.5 J/g, a thermal
                               conductivity of 1.79 W/(m·K), a solar–thermal conversion efficiency higher than 80%, the
                               disappearance of supercooling, and improved stability in terms of leakage and repeated
                               heating/cooling cycles.
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                  16 of 30
 Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                                 15 of 28




                                 Figure
                                   Figure9.9.(a)(a)Biomass-derived
                                                    Biomass-derivedcarbon-encapsulated
                                                                      carbon-encapsulatedshape-stabilized
                                                                                           shape-stabilizedsodium
                                                                                                             sodiumsulfate
                                                                                                                      sulfatedecahydrate
                                                                                                                              decahydrate
                                 (SSD)  composites     (Figure 9a reprinted/adapted with permission  from  Ref. [96].
                                   (SSD) composites (Figure 9a reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [96]. 2024,2024, Elsevier). (b)
                                                                                                                                 Elsevier).
                                 Preparation of compressed biochar from watermelon rind and a biochar–hydrated salt composite.
                                   (b) Preparation of compressed biochar from watermelon rind and a biochar–hydrated salt composite.
                                 (Figure 9b reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [74]. 2020, Elsevier).
                                   (Figure 9b reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [74]. 2020, Elsevier).
                                 4.6. Hydrated Salt–Activated
                                        By employing          Carbonconverted
                                                       the biochar   Compositesfrom the biomass waste of watermelon rinds,
                                       Activated
                                   Qian,   Wang, carbon,       known as[74]
                                                     and colleagues         activated    charcoal,
                                                                                  reported          is a form of of
                                                                                             the preparation       porous    carbon supporting
                                                                                                                      lamellar-structured        SAT
                                 material   characterized
                                   composites.     As shownby   inaFigure
                                                                     high surface     area to volume
                                                                             9b, watermelon     rind was ratio. Activated
                                                                                                            subject          carbon is typically
                                                                                                                     to hydrothermal      treatment
                                   at 220 ◦ C,byfollowed
                                 produced         the pyrolysis      of organic
                                                            by hydraulic           materials such
                                                                               compression           as cheap
                                                                                               in a steel   moldwaste    biomass, followed
                                                                                                                   and freeze-drying             by
                                                                                                                                           to obtain
                                 ancompressed
                                     activation process
                                                    BDCs. thatThe increases
                                                                     obtained the      number
                                                                                  biochar   wasof    micro and mesopores
                                                                                                  impregnated       within molten on the    carbon
                                                                                                                                       SAT/CMC
                                 structure,   enhancing
                                   under vacuum,       and its
                                                             theadsorptive      properties.was
                                                                   resultant composite        Thefurther
                                                                                                   activation    can be done
                                                                                                            compressed     within through
                                                                                                                                    a moldpurg-before
                                 ing  high-temperature
                                   solidification.             steamhydrated
                                                      The melted        or carbon     dioxide
                                                                                   salts        or using between
                                                                                         were confined      chemicalthe  agents   suchBDC
                                                                                                                            lamellar     as phos-
                                                                                                                                               sheets
                                   without
                                 phoric   acidleakage    occurring,
                                                 or potassium           and the [86].
                                                                    hydroxide      composites    demonstrated
                                                                                         Depending      on the raw  a low   supercooling
                                                                                                                       material               degree
                                                                                                                                   and pyrolysis
                                   of 0.9 ◦ C,activated
                                 processes,     a latent heat
                                                           carbon storage
                                                                      can becapacity    higher
                                                                               hydrophilic    andthan
                                                                                                   its 200   J/g, surface
                                                                                                        internal  a solar–thermal      conversion
                                                                                                                            can be modified       to
                                   efficiency   up  to 80%    and   excellent    thermal   cycling  stability.
                                 tailor its interaction with hydrated salts. Compared to other minerals such as zeolites, alu-
                                 mina, metal organic frameworks and silica gels, activated carbon has higher thermal con-
                                   4.6. Hydrated
                                 ductivity          Salt–Activated
                                             and cost    advantagesCarbon [97,98].Composites
                                         Activated
                                       Bennici        carbon,
                                                  et al.         known as
                                                         [99] reported      theactivated   charcoal,
                                                                                  use of bead         is a form
                                                                                                activated         of porous
                                                                                                              carbon   with acarbon    supporting
                                                                                                                                specific   surface
                                   material
                                 area         characterized
                                        of 1300      m2/g as bythe   a high   surface
                                                                         matrix     for area to volume ratio.
                                                                                          encapsulating           Activatedsulfate
                                                                                                             magnesium         carbon is    typically
                                                                                                                                         hydrates
                                 (MgSO4·7H2O). The preparation process mainly involved slowly depositing the salt mix-by
                                   produced     by  the  pyrolysis     of organic    materials  such   as  cheap   waste   biomass,   followed
                                   an activation
                                 ture  inside the process
                                                      activated that   increases
                                                                    carbon          the number
                                                                              through              of micro and
                                                                                          wet impregnation           mesopores
                                                                                                                  before   filteringonthrough
                                                                                                                                        the carbon a
                                   structure,   enhancing     its adsorptive     properties.  The   activation   can
                                 Buchner funnel, and finally, oven-drying. They demonstrated that the resultant compo-be  done   through     purging
                                   high-temperature
                                 sites could be used for   steam    or carbon dioxide
                                                               high-performance             or using chemical
                                                                                       thermochemical               agentswith
                                                                                                            heat storage     suchaas   phosphoric
                                                                                                                                     high   energy
                                   acid  or potassium      hydroxide      [86]. Depending     on  the  raw   material   and
                                 storage density of 920 J/g. The activated carbon supporting material facilitates the filling pyrolysis   processes,
                                 ofactivated    carbonwithin
                                    the composites        can bethe hydrophilic     and its internal
                                                                        reactor, improves     the water  surface  can beand
                                                                                                            adsorption     modified    to tailor
                                                                                                                                desorption      per-its
                                   interaction    with   hydrated      salts.   Compared     to  other   minerals
                                 formance, enhances heat transfer within the composites and homogenizes the tempera- such   as zeolites,   alumina,
                                   metal
                                 ture     organic frameworks
                                       distribution                   and silica
                                                       of the composites.          gels,demonstrated
                                                                                 They    activated carbon the has  higher of
                                                                                                               feasibility  thermal   conductivity
                                                                                                                               employing      these
                                   and  cost   advantages     [97,98].
                                 thermochemical heat storage composites for house heating and producing hot water.
                                         Bennici et al. [99] reported the use of bead activated carbon with a specific surface area
                                 4.7. 1300 m2 /g
                                   of Hydrated       as the matrix
                                                  Salt–Hybrid          for encapsulating
                                                                  Carbon    Composites        magnesium sulfate hydrates (MgSO4 ·7H2 O).
                                   The preparation process mainly involved slowly depositing the salt mixture inside the
                                       By modifying carbon materials with other functional additives, hybrid carbon mate-
                                   activated carbon through wet impregnation before filtering through a Buchner funnel,
                                 rials can further enhance the original thermophysical properties of hydrated salts, provide
                                   and finally, oven-drying. They demonstrated that the resultant composites could be used
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                                 16 of 28




                                 for high-performance thermochemical heat storage with a high energy storage density of
                                 920 J/g. The activated carbon supporting material facilitates the filling of the composites
                                 within the reactor, improves the water adsorption and desorption performance, enhances
                                 heat transfer within the composites and homogenizes the temperature distribution of the
                                 composites. They demonstrated the feasibility of employing these thermochemical heat
                                 storage composites for house heating and producing hot water.
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                   17 of 30
                                 4.7. Hydrated Salt–Hybrid Carbon Composites
                                       By modifying carbon materials with other functional additives, hybrid carbon materi-
                                 als can further enhance the original thermophysical properties of hydrated salts, provide
                                 extra means
                                 extra  means to  to tune
                                                      tune the
                                                             the charging/discharging
                                                                  charging/discharging and      and phase     change behaviors,
                                                                                                      phase change      behaviors, and
                                                                                                                                     and expand
                                                                                                                                           expand
                                 the application
                                 the  applicationscope scopeofofPCMs
                                                                   PCMs   [28,72,84,100].
                                                                             [28,72,84,100]. ForFor
                                                                                                  example,     hybridizing
                                                                                                        example,              carbon
                                                                                                                    hybridizing       fillersfillers
                                                                                                                                   carbon       with
                                 magnetic-response
                                 with  magnetic-response  fillersfillers
                                                                    or electrical   conductors
                                                                          or electrical  conductors  can can
                                                                                                          allow   for for
                                                                                                              allow   charging
                                                                                                                          chargingandand
                                                                                                                                       storage
                                                                                                                                            storageof
                                 magnetic-thermal        and    electro-thermal     energy     within    PCMs
                                 of magnetic-thermal and electro-thermal energy within PCMs and enable the dynamicand  enable   the dynamic       tai-
                                 loring of of
                                 tailoring  thethe
                                                 charging
                                                     charging  process
                                                                  process through
                                                                             throughapplying
                                                                                       applying   external
                                                                                                     externalmagnetic
                                                                                                                magnetic oror
                                                                                                                            electrical  fields.
                                                                                                                               electrical  fields.
                                       Li et al.
                                             al. [64]
                                                   [64] utilized
                                                         utilized Fe Fe33O44-modified
                                                                            -modified    CNTs     to   improve    the  thermal   conductivity      of
                                             encapsulated within
                                 solar salts encapsulated         within SiO22 shells and provide the composites with solar–thermal
                                       magnetic–thermal conversion
                                 and magnetic–thermal           conversion capabilities
                                                                               capabilities(Figure
                                                                                               (Figure10a).
                                                                                                         10a). The
                                                                                                                The superparamagnetic
                                                                                                                     superparamagneticFe      Fe33OO44
                                 nanoparticles were
                                 nanoparticles      were in
                                                          in situ
                                                               situ formed
                                                                    formed on  on the
                                                                                  the surfaces
                                                                                       surfaces of  of MWCNTs
                                                                                                        MWCNTsthrough
                                                                                                                    throughreducing
                                                                                                                               reducingFe Fe2+2+
                                                                                                                                                 and
                                 Fe3+
                                    3+ with ammonia. The Fe3O4-modified CNTs, together with SiO2 capsules, improved the
                                       with ammonia. The Fe3 O4 -modified CNTs, together with SiO2 capsules, improved
                                 thermal   conductivity
                                 the thermal     conductivity fromfrom0.2360.236
                                                                              W/(m·K)
                                                                                   W/(m    ·K)
                                                                                         for  theforneat
                                                                                                      thesolar
                                                                                                          neat salts
                                                                                                                 solarto  0.483
                                                                                                                        salts to W/(m·K)
                                                                                                                                 0.483 W/(m  with ·K)
                                                                                                                                                    3
                                 wt% 3loading.
                                 with               In contrast
                                         wt% loading.              to neat
                                                            In contrast    tosolar   salts salts
                                                                               neat solar   that have     poorpoor
                                                                                                   that have    solarsolar
                                                                                                                        absorptance
                                                                                                                            absorptanceandand no re-
                                                                                                                                                   no
                                 response
                                 sponse totomagnetic
                                               magneticfields,fields,the
                                                                       thecomposites
                                                                            compositescan candirectly
                                                                                                directly harvest
                                                                                                           harvest solar-thermal
                                                                                                                     solar-thermal energy and
                                 can be charged by applying alternatingalternating magnetic
                                                                                      magnetic fields.
                                                                                                   fields.




                                 Figure 10.
                                         10. (a)
                                             (a) Compounding
                                                 CompoundingSiO  SiO22solar
                                                                       solarsalts
                                                                             saltswith
                                                                                   withFeFe
                                                                                          3O4-modified CNTs for simultaneous harvesting
                                 Figure                                                     3 O4 -modified CNTs for simultaneous harvest-
                                 of solar-thermal   and magnetic-thermal    energy  (Figure   10a reprinted/adapted with permission from
                                 ing of solar-thermal and magnetic-thermal energy (Figure 10a reprinted/adapted with permission
                                 Ref. [64]. 2023, Elsevier). (b) Magnesium chloride hexahydrate (MgCl2·6H2O, MCH) impregnated
                                 from Ref. [64]. 2023, Elsevier). (b) Magnesium chloride hexahydrate (MgCl2 ·6H2 O, MCH) im-
                                 within a GO-decorated sponge for latent heat and thermochemical storage (Figure 10b re-
                                 pregnated within a GO-decorated sponge for latent heat and thermochemical storage (Figure 10b
                                 printed/adapted with permission from Ref. [101]. 2023, Springer nature). (c) Dual-functional Fe–Cr–
                                 reprinted/adapted
                                 Al mesh coated with  with permission from
                                                         nano-graphite       Ref. [101].
                                                                        for movable      2023, Springer
                                                                                       charging           nature). (c)energy
                                                                                                  of solar-thermal      Dual-functional  Fe–Cr–
                                                                                                                              and electro-ther-
                                 Al
                                 malmesh  coated
                                      energy       with10c
                                               (Figure  nano-graphite  for movable
                                                           reprinted/adapted    with charging
                                                                                     permission of solar-thermal energy
                                                                                                    from Ref. [102].   2023,and electro-thermal
                                                                                                                             Elsevier).
                                 energy (Figure 10c reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [102]. 2023, Elsevier).
                                     In addition to microencapsulation, Yu et al. [101] coated a transparent and superhy-
                                 drophobic silicone gel onto the external surfaces of magnesium chloride hexahydrate
                                 (MgCl2·6H2O, MCH) composites to prevent the loss of crystallization water during re-
                                 peated thermal energy storage processes. As shown in Figure 10b, the commercial mela-
                                 mine sponge was coated with GO through cyclic impregnation and the GO-decorated
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                         17 of 28




                                     In addition to microencapsulation, Yu et al. [101] coated a transparent and super-
                               hydrophobic silicone gel onto the external surfaces of magnesium chloride hexahydrate
                               (MgCl2 ·6H2 O, MCH) composites to prevent the loss of crystallization water during re-
                               peated thermal energy storage processes. As shown in Figure 10b, the commercial melamine
                               sponge was coated with GO through cyclic impregnation and the GO-decorated sponge
                               enabled photothermal conversion, suppressed the supercooling and leakage of MCH and
                               improved heat transfer during charging and discharging processes. In comparison with
                               impregnation within 3D porous carbon, the GO-decorated sponge reduced the usage of car-
                               bon materials and significantly improved the mechanical flexibility of the PCM composites.
                               In addition to solid–liquid phase change latent heat thermal storage, the PCM composites
                               could stably undergo hydration–dehydration to store thermochemical energy owing to the
                               anti-leakage encapsulation by the silicone gel layer.
                                     In addition to solar–thermal and magnetic–thermal conversion, Li et al. [102] re-
                               ported the fabrication of a multifunctional composite mesh charger that also enables the
                               electro-thermal charging of PCMs. As shown in Figure 10c, such a multifunctional charger
                               was prepared by coating Fe–Cr–Al meshes with a graphite layer and an external poly-
                               dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layer. The inner Fe–Cr–Al mesh is electrically conductive and
                               can efficiently convert electrical energy into heat with low voltage input. The graphite
                               coating layer can not only enable the absorption of broadband sunlight and its direct
                               conversion into heat, but can also provide the desired rough surfaces to amply the surface
                               wettability of the mesh. The composite mesh achieved a high solar absorptance of ~94%, a
                               high electrical conductivity of 6622 S/cm, strong resistance to corrosion and outstanding
                               high-temperature stability.
                                     Different from conventional slow heat diffusion-based charging, the mesh charger,
                               driven by gravity, can continuously track the melting interface, thus realizing fast charging
                               within large-volume PCMs. This dynamic charging approach demonstrates rapid heat
                               response and a stable rapid charging rate and can be charged by both low-voltage electricity
                               and large-flux solar illumination. This method achieves a high solar-thermal phase change
                               efficiency (~90.1%) and electro-thermal storage efficiency (~86.1%), while maintaining
                               approximately 100% of the energy density of the PCM. They also demonstrated that the
                               dynamic charging process could be further accelerated by applying external magnetic fields
                               to directionally drive the movement of the mesh charger within the melted PCM [103,104].
                               Such dynamic charging is applicable to a wide range of inorganic and organic PCMs,
                               offering a solution to overcome the dilemma of achieving fast charging rates and sacrificing
                               the latent heat storage density encountered in thermal-enhanced PCM composites.

                               4.8. Comparison of Property Enhancements by Different Carbon Fillers
                                    As summarized in Table 2, the incorporation of various carbon fillers at relatively low
                               loadings can simultaneously increase thermal conductivity, reduce supercooling degree,
                               mitigate leakage, and improve the cycling stability of different hydrated salts while larging
                               retaining the high latent heat storage capacity of the original PCMs. In comparison, the
                               enhancement effects of specific thermophysical properties vary for different carbon fillers.
                                    In terms of enhancing the thermal conductivity of the composites, CNTs and EG
                               have shown much stronger enhancement effect than other carbon fillers, which could
                               be attributed to their intrinsic high thermal conductivities and their capabilities to form
                               connected heat conduction paths within the PCM composites. Specifically, 1D carbon fillers
                               such as CNTs and CFs have large aspect ratio features, which allow for the formation
                               of percolated thermal conduction paths with low loadings of fillers. By contrast, the
                               enhancement of thermal conductivity by GO, biochar, and activated carbon is not so obvious
                               due to their intrinsically lower thermal conductivity and failures in forming connected
                               heat-conduction networks within the bulk composites. Without being subject to high-
                               temperature heating and crystallization processes, these carbon fillers do not possess highly
                               ordered crystalline structures to efficiently conduct heat. Meanwhile, these carbon fillers
                               most often have many defects that can strongly impede heat transfer. The stronger thermal
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                        18 of 28




                                      conductivity enhancement from CNTs than CFs is related to the dispersion state of these
                                      fillers within the hydrated salts. Generally, carbon fillers with hydrophilic surfaces have
                                      shown good wetting with hydrated salts, homogeneous dispersion, and reduced interfacial
                                      thermal resistance. Although 1D or 2D carbon fillers can also form percolated networks
                                      with increasing loadings, strong interfacial thermal resistance among neighboring fillers is
                                      unavoidable. Three-dimensional carbon foams, such as EG sheets that have been subject to
                                      compression molding, can effectively reduce interfacial thermal resistance between carbon
                                      fillers due to its existing connected heat-conduction networks.

                                      Table 2. Enhancement of the thermophysical properties of hydrated salts by various carbon fillers.

                                                                 Theral        Supercooling
                                           PCM      Carbon                                                                  ∆H
       Hydrated Salt           Filler                          Conductivity     Degree          Leakage       Tm (◦ C)               Ref.
                                          (wt%)     (wt%)                                                                  (J/g)
                                                                (W/m·K)           (◦ C)
     Mg(NO3 )2 ·6H2 O           CNT        99.5       0.5           0.73                      Not mentioned     90.8       141.4     [78]
     Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O           CNT        94.55      1.25                                    Not mentioned     44.32      216.32    [79]
    Al2 (SO4 )3 ·18H2 O/
                                CNT         94         5            3.23                       No leakage       98.74      422.4     [81]
    FeSO4 ·7H2 O (2:1)
    CH3 COONa·3H2 O             CNT         90         2           7.178           0.6         No leakage        55        177.6     [82]
     Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O            CF         72         8           1.91                        No leakage                            [84]
     Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O/
                                 CF        96.9       3.1          1.756           0.7         No leakage       31.4       157.1     [85]
   Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O (9:1)
     Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O           GO         95.4       0.3                                     Not mentioned   42.5, 48.8    229      [67]
     Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O/
                                GO          92         3            1.1             8          No leakage        23        200.3     [69]
   Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O (2:3)
    CH3 COONa·3H2 O             GO         98.5       0.15                         1.9         No leakage       57.83      252.8     [87]
       MgCl2 ·6H2 O-
                                EG         81.9       15           4.789                       No leakage       23.5       196.2     [91]
   NH4 Al(SO4 )2 ·12H2 O
     Na2 CO3 ·10H2 O             EG        85.5        5            2.74            0.8        No leakage       31.52      123.6     [92]
    CH3 COONa·3H2 O              EG         88        12            6.4            1.49        No leakage       47.14       200      [94]
      Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O          Biochar      83        9             1.79                       No leakage       30.2       161.5     [96]
    CH3 COONa·3H2 O            Biochar                              1.17           0.9         No leakage        61.1      209.8     [74]


                                            In terms of improving leakage and cycling stability and reducing supercooling, it
                                      is critical to provide sufficient capillary confinement forces and ample porous space that
                                      can adsorb the melted hydrated salts. Hydrophilic foams or networks with abundant
                                      surface functional groups can provide strong capillary forces to trap melted salts and
                                      can form hydrogen bonds with water molecules inside the composites, thus preventing
                                      the loss of crystallization water during repeated heating/cooling cycles. Reducing the
                                      supercooling of hydrated salts by adding heterogeneous carbon fillers is mainly influenced
                                      by the contact angle between the PCM crystal and the nucleating agent. In general, the
                                      hydrophilic surfaces of carbon fillers can serve as the desired heterogenous nucleation
                                      sites to lower the supercooling degree. To this end, GO, biochar and activated carbons are
                                      more favored for reducing supercooling. Alternatively, introducing hydrophilic functional
                                      groups onto the surfaces of graphene and EG can suppress supercooling while signifi-
                                      cantly increasing the effective thermal conductivity. Therefore, a compatible interface is
                                      critical for the improvement of thermal conductivity, anti-leakage, cycling stability, and
                                      lowering supercooling.
                                            In comparison with single-component carbon fillers, introducing other functional com-
                                      ponents has demonstrated the capability to further improve the thermophysical properties
                                      of PCM composites and add extra functionalities. Most importantly, hybrid functional
                                      fillers can offer unique means to dynamically tune the charging/discharging process and
                                      achieve unprecedent comprehensive performance improvements.

                                      5. Thermal Energy Management Applications
                                      5.1. Thermal Management of Electronic Devices
                                          Normal function of electronic devices requires a stable suitable working temperature
                                      range. For example, at low temperatures, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) often suffer from
                                      reduced capacity and a sharply declined lifetime due to decreased Li+ diffusion within
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                  19 of 28




                                   both the electrodes and electrolyte [105,106]. At high temperatures, LIBs also show a drop
                                   in capacity, increased internal resistance, degradation of the electrodes and electrolyte, and
                                   even safety risks such as thermal runaway (TR), which triggers a chain reaction that can
                                   result in catching fire or an explosion [107,108]. By undergoing reversible melting and
                                   solidification, hydrated salts can absorb excessive heat in a timely manner and release the
                                   latent heat when the temperature of the electronic device drops below the freezing point of
                                   the PCM, thus offering a facile method for the passive thermal management of electronic
                                   devices [10,29].
                                         LIBs are recommended to be operated within the temperature range of −40–60 ◦ C
                                   to achieve optimum performances. With mechanical abuse such as nail penetration or
                                   electrical abuse such as forming a short-circuit, TR may occur, suddenly releasing an enor-
                                   mous amount of heat, and inducing serious safety problems including smoke, fire and
                                   explosion. As shown in Figure 11a, Zhang’s group [109] employed SAT/EG composites
                                   for the two-stage thermal management of LIBs, namely a solid–liquid phase change at
                                   58 ◦ C and thermochemical heat absorption in the temperature range of 106–140 ◦ C. After
                                   compounding SAT with 20 wt% of EG, the resultant composites showed a high thermal
                                   conductivity of 4.96 W/(m·K), and the interconnected EG networks could confine melted
                                   SAT inside. At the first stage, the melting of the SAT/EG composites with a heat storage
                                   density of 225.1 kJ/kg could effectively keep the temperature of LIBs below the safe opera-
                                   tion limit. In comparison with thermal management with organic PCMs, it was found that
                                   the SAT/EG composites could achieve cooler and more uniform temperature distribution
                                   when cooling a 20-cell battery pack and had price and safety advantages [110]. At the
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                     21 of 30
                                   second stage, the chemical decomposition of SAT/EG composites through losing crystal-
                                   lization water at elevated temperatures could absorb a large amount of heat (568.3 kJ/kg)
                                   and inhibit TR propagation. Theoretical modeling showed that the SAT/EG composites
                                    completely
                                   could         prevent
                                          completely      cascadecascade
                                                        prevent    TR when TRawhen
                                                                               singleabattery
                                                                                        single cell within
                                                                                               battery  cella within
                                                                                                              battery apack was pack
                                                                                                                        battery  pen-
                                    etrated
                                   was      with a nail.
                                         penetrated  withBya contrast, if using commercial
                                                             nail. By contrast,              aerogel thermal
                                                                                 if using commercial    aerogelinsulation   materials
                                                                                                                 thermal insulation
                                    to wrap the
                                   materials     battery,
                                              to wrap  thethe cascade
                                                           battery, theTR  was delayed
                                                                         cascade  TR wasbut  not avoidable.
                                                                                          delayed   but not avoidable.




                                Figure 11.
                                Figure  11. (a)
                                             (a) SAT/EG
                                                  SAT/EGcomposites
                                                         compositesforforthe two-stage
                                                                           the         thermal
                                                                               two-stage       management
                                                                                         thermal  management  of of
                                                                                                                 LIBs  (Figure
                                                                                                                     LIBs      11a11a
                                                                                                                          (Figure  re-
                                printed/adapted with permission from Ref. [109]. 2022, Elsevier). (b) Passive cooling of commercial
                                reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [109]. 2022, Elsevier). (b) Passive cooling of commercial
                                PV panels by attaching a polyacrylamide hydrogel loaded with CNTs and CaCl2 to the back side
                                PV panels by attaching a polyacrylamide hydrogel loaded with CNTs and CaCl2 to the back side
                                (Figure 11b reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [111]. 2020, Springer nature).
                                (Figure 11b reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [111]. 2020, Springer nature).
                                       Photovoltaic (PV) panels are another type of popular electronic devices that require
                                 critical thermal management. The eﬃciency of commercial PV panels is typically lower
                                 than 25%, which means that massive amount of heat is generated during the solar–elec-
                                 trical conversion process. The generated heat significantly increases the panel tempera-
                                 ture, leading to reduced electricity generation eﬃciency and the shortened lifetime of PV
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                       20 of 28




                                     Photovoltaic (PV) panels are another type of popular electronic devices that require
                               critical thermal management. The efficiency of commercial PV panels is typically lower
                               than 25%, which means that massive amount of heat is generated during the solar–electrical
                               conversion process. The generated heat significantly increases the panel temperature, lead-
                               ing to reduced electricity generation efficiency and the shortened lifetime of PV panels.
                               Instead of adopting active cooling techniques such as water spray cooling or forced airflow
                               circulation, as shown in Figure 11b, Wang’s team [111] reported passive cooling of com-
                               mercial PV panels by attaching a hydrogel composite at the back. The hydrogel composite
                               was prepared through in situ polymerization of polyacrylamide (PAM) in a dispersion
                               of CNTs followed by freeze-drying and immersion in CaCl2 solution. The hygroscopic
                               CaCl2 salts enabled the large-capacity adsorption of water vapor from the surrounding
                               air at night. During the daytime, the hot PV panels heated up the hydrogel composites
                               and induced the evaporation of the adsorbed water, which in turn brought down the
                               temperature. CNTs were used to increase the emissivity of the cooling composites and
                               enhance radiative cooling performances. Under one-sun illumination, the temperature
                               of the PV panel was reduced by more than 10 ◦ C. Outdoor field tests conducted in Saudi
                               Arabia showed that after attaching the hydrogel composites, the electricity generation was
                               increased by 19% and 13% in summer and winter, respectively. Through further integrating
                               with an aluminum condensation chamber, they further demonstrated the capability to
                               produce clean water from ambient air. The harvested water could be used for cleaning the
                               dust on the PV panels or even for meeting personal drinking needs.

                               5.2. Thermal Management of Buildings
                                     Building energy consumption accounts for about ~30% of the global energy budget
                               and contributes ~30% of CO2 emissions. A large portion of thermal energy is used for
                               heating, cooling and maintaining indoor temperatures in residential, commercial and public
                               buildings. Incorporating low-cost hydrated salt PCMs into various parts of buildings, such
                               as the roof, the wall and the floor, offers the opportunity to reduce energy consumption,
                               enhance indoor thermal comfort and facilitate the usage of renewable thermal energy.
                                     Wang et al. [96] conducted a proof-of-demonstration experiment by employing a
                               composite material made of SSD hydrated salts and biomass charcoal on a roof to stabilize
                               the temperature of buildings (Figure 12a). The PCM composite was enclosed in a square
                               box made of acrylic board, surrounded by insulation materials that simulated the concrete
                               used in practical buildings. To mimic daytime and night conditions, they turned on a
                               xenon lamp on for 5000 s and turned off the lamp for 10,000 s. Compared with the pristine
                               roof, the roof equipped with PCM composites had much smaller temperature fluctuation.
                               They also carried out economic analyses on the static and dynamic payback period and
                               pointed out that the inorganic hydrated salt/biochar composites were more economical
                               than other PCM systems owing to the cost advantages from both hydrated salts and the
                               biomass biochar.
                                     In another work [112], researchers conducted economic analyses on employing hy-
                               drated salt composites for household heating (Figure 12b). They observed that it took
                               a longer time to charge the PCM composites under low-intensity sunlight illumination
                               conditions. The phase-change durations under 0.8 sun and 0.6 sun were 2610 s and 5540 s,
                               respectively. Using hot water production as an example, they compared the costs of elec-
                               tricity consumption and the raw materials for fabricating the PCM composites and found
                               that the solar-thermal PCM composites had a payback period of ~3 years.
                                     In addition to roof heating and producing hot water, Zhang’s group developed a
                               dual-layer radiant floor system using hydrated salt–EG composites for indoor thermal
                               comfort regulation in winter and summer [113]. As shown in Figure 12c, the floor system
                               had a heat storage layer made of Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O–Na2 SiO3 ·5H2 O/EG composite (melting
                               point: 31.3 ◦ C), and a cold storage layer made of CaCl2 ·6H2 O–NH4 Cl-SrCl2 ·6H2 O/EG
                               composite (melting point: 20.2 ◦ C). By placing the heat storage layer on top and the cold
                               storage layer at bottom, the radiation floor doubled the thermal comfort duration of the
                               ings, such as the roof, the wall and the floor, oﬀers the opportunity to reduce energy con-
                               sumption, enhance indoor thermal comfort and facilitate the usage of renewable thermal
                               energy.
                                     Wang et al. [96] conducted a proof-of-demonstration experiment by employing a
                               composite material made of SSD hydrated salts and biomass charcoal on a roof to stabilize
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077   the temperature of buildings (Figure 12a). The PCM composite was enclosed in a square            21 of 28
                               box made of acrylic board, surrounded by insulation materials that simulated the concrete
                               used in practical buildings. To mimic daytime and night conditions, they turned on a
                               xenon   lamp
                               test room     on for
                                           when      5000 s and
                                                  compared      turned
                                                             with        oﬀ the
                                                                  the room      lamp
                                                                             only      for 10,000
                                                                                   containing      s. Compared
                                                                                                 pebbles           withinthe
                                                                                                          in the floor     thepristine
                                                                                                                               winter
                               roof, the roof
                               climate.        equipped
                                          In the          with PCM
                                                  summertime,    the composites
                                                                      radiant floorhad  much
                                                                                     with   an smaller   temperature
                                                                                                 upper cold              fluctuation.
                                                                                                               storage layer    and a
                               They
                               loweralso
                                      heatcarried
                                            storageout   economic
                                                     layer providedanalyses   on comfort
                                                                      a thermal   the static and dynamic
                                                                                           duration    up to 8payback
                                                                                                               h. Comparedperiodtoand
                                                                                                                                    the
                               referenceout
                               pointed    room   that
                                              that thedid not havehydrated
                                                        inorganic   the PCMsalt/biochar
                                                                              radiant floorcomposites
                                                                                              installed, itwere
                                                                                                            was estimated     that the
                                                                                                                  more economical
                               phase  change
                               than other   PCM room   couldowing
                                                   systems   save on
                                                                   to electricity  costs by more
                                                                       the cost advantages     fromthan
                                                                                                      both50%   duringsalts
                                                                                                            hydrated      winter
                                                                                                                              andandthe
                               summer    days.
                               biomass biochar.




                               Figure
                               Figure 12. 12. (a)
                                                (a)SSD–biochar
                                                     SSD–biochar  hydrated saltsalt
                                                                     hydrated   composites   incorporated
                                                                                     composites             within
                                                                                                  incorporated     a roofafor
                                                                                                                within        stabilizing
                                                                                                                           roof           build-
                                                                                                                                 for stabilizing
                               ing temperature (Figure 12a reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [96]. 2024, Elsevier). (b)
                               building temperature (Figure 12a reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [96]. 2024, Else-
                               Hydrated salt composites for household heating (Figure 12b reprinted/adapted with permission
                               vier). (b) Hydrated salt composites for household heating (Figure 12b reprinted/adapted with
                               from Ref. [112]. 2023, Elsevier). (c) A radiant floor system consisting of a heat storage layer made of
                               permission
                               Na2HPO4·12H      from   Ref. [112]. 2023, Elsevier). (c) A radiant floor system consisting of a heat storage
                                                    2O–Na2SiO3·5H2O/EG composite and a cold storage layer made of CaCl2·6H2O–
                               layer  made      of
                               NH4Cl-SrCl2·6H2O/EG   Na        ·12H2 O–Nafor
                                                        2 HPO4composite           3 ·5H2 O/EGindoor
                                                                            2 SiOimproving      composite   and a cold
                                                                                                        thermal         storage
                                                                                                                   comfort       layer made
                                                                                                                              (Figure         of
                                                                                                                                        12c re-
                               CaCl    · 6H
                               printed/adapted
                                     2      2 O–NH       Cl-SrCl
                                                      with
                                                       4          · 6H
                                                             permission
                                                                2      O/EG   composite   for improving
                                                                      2 from Ref. [113]. 2020, Elsevier). indoor thermal   comfort   (Figure 12c
                               reprinted/adapted with permission from Ref. [113]. 2020, Elsevier).
                                     In another work [112], researchers conducted economic analyses on employing hy-
                               5.3. Thermal Management of the Human Body
                               drated salt composites for household heating (Figure 12b). They observed that it took a
                               longerDue  to the
                                        time  to non-toxic
                                                 charge theand harmless
                                                             PCM        natureunder
                                                                  composites  of hydrate  salts and their
                                                                                     low-intensity        suitable
                                                                                                     sunlight      tempera-
                                                                                                               illumination
                               ture range, the use of composite materials for biological thermotherapy to alleviate local
                               pain and promote blood circulation has become another important application direction.
                               Hydrate salts have been compounded with other functional materials to prepare high-
                               performance, flexible, wearable composites that can be charged with light, electricity or
                               magnetic fields to heat up the human body, blood vessels or the air people breathe.
                                     Xu and coworkers reported the preparation of photothermal hydrogel composites
                               by using SAT as the PCM, GO as the photothermal agent, and acrylamide and konjac
                               glucomannan as the supporting structure [112]. The hydrogel networks simultaneously
                               reduce the leakage of melted SAT, suppress supercooling, enhance heat transfer and afford
                               the composites with mechanical flexibility. The incorporation of GO enables the charging
                               Hydrate salts have been compounded with other functional materials to prepare high-
                               performance, flexible, wearable composites that can be charged with light, electricity or
                               magnetic fields to heat up the human body, blood vessels or the air people breathe.
                                     Xu and coworkers reported the preparation of photothermal hydrogel composites by
                               using SAT as the PCM, GO as the photothermal agent, and acrylamide and konjac gluco-
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077   mannan as the supporting structure [112]. The hydrogel networks simultaneously reduce        22 of 28
                               the leakage of melted SAT, suppress supercooling, enhance heat transfer and aﬀord the
                               composites with mechanical flexibility. The incorporation of GO enables the charging of
                               thethe
                               of   PCM
                                      PCM composites
                                            compositeswith
                                                        withdirect
                                                              directsolar
                                                                     solarillumination,
                                                                            illumination,with
                                                                                            withaahigh
                                                                                                  high conversion
                                                                                                        conversion eﬃciency
                                                                                                                     efficiency ofof
                               89.7%.  In comparison  to traditional  heating   techniques  using hot  water or hot towels,
                               89.7%. In comparison to traditional heating techniques using hot water or hot towels, PCM     PCM
                               composites can better retain the thermotherapy temperature within a narrow range and
                               prolong the heat-releasing
                               prolong      heat-releasing duration.
                                                            duration. As shown in Figure 13a, the  the SAT–hydrogel
                                                                                                       SAT–hydrogel composite
                                                      photothermal conversion to 55 ◦°C
                               that was charged by photothermal                                                   attached onto
                                                                                             C could be directly attached
                                                 provide stable
                               human skin and provide      stable thermotherapy
                                                                  thermotherapy for for 55 min.
                                                                                           min.




                               Figure 13. (a) An SAT–hydrogel composite attached onto human
                                                                                        human skin
                                                                                                skin to
                                                                                                     to provide
                                                                                                        provide stable
                                                                                                                  stable thermother-
                                                                                                                         thermother-
                               apy for
                               apy  for 55 min.
                                           min. (Figure
                                                 (Figure13a
                                                         13areprinted/adapted with
                                                              reprinted/adapted    permission
                                                                                with          from
                                                                                     permission     Ref.Ref.
                                                                                                 from     [112]. 2023,
                                                                                                             [112].     Elsevier).
                                                                                                                     2023,         (b)
                                                                                                                            Elsevier).
                               (b) Preparation of self-healable SAT–hydrogel composites that could be attached onto the back ofa
                               Preparation   of self-healable SAT–hydrogel  composites that could  be attached   onto  the  back of
                               a human hand or arm, providing thermal comfort for 20 min (Figure 13b reprinted/adapted with
                               permission from Ref. [114]. 2023, Elsevier).

                                     To pursue personal thermal management applications and overcome the drawbacks of
                               pristine hydrated salts, Liu et al. [114] prepared self-healing flexible hydrogel composites
                               by blending SAT with acrylamide, aqueous starch and graphite followed by subsequent
                               radical initiated polymerization of the acrylamide. They pointed out that the addition of
                               graphite not only effectively addressed supercooling issues, but also enhanced the cyclic
                               performance of the composite. The flexible hydrogel networks allowed the composite to
                               undergo 40% deformation and the rich hydrogen bonding within the composites enabled
                               the self-healing capability. The flexibility and self-healing of the hydrogel–SAT composites
                               facilitated their integration with wearable textiles for thermal management of the human
                               body. As shown by the infrared images in Figure 13b, the composites could be attached
                               onto the back of the human hand or the arm, providing thermal comfort at temperatures
                               above 40 ◦ C for more than 15 min owing to the high latent heat storage capacity.

                               6. Summary and Outlook
                                     This work overviews the recent progress in designing and fabricating carbon-enhanced
                               hydrated salt PCM composites that overcome the shortcomings of pristine hydrated salts,
                               such as low thermal conductivity, supercooling, phase separation, poor cycling stability
                               and leakage, and enable the direct conversion of other forms of energy into storable heat,
                               thereby enabling their thermal management applications.
                                     Although substantial improvement in their thermophysical properties had been
                               achieved with the addition of various carbon fillers, how to rationally design the fillers
                               to optimize the comprehensive performance of the hydrated salt PCM composite is still a
                               grand challenge. It requires continuous research efforts to gain a deeper understanding of
                               the enhancing mechanisms, exploring advanced fabrication and characterization tools, and
                               expanding the application fields of hydrated salt PCM composites. It is recommended that
                               the research community working on carbon-enhanced inorganic PCM composites can take
                               full advantage of the fast development of organic PCM composites. For example, there are
                               several comprehensive review articles on the design, fabrication, performance and applica-
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                          23 of 28




                               tions of carbon-enhanced organic PCM composites [115–117], which can provide valuable
                               guidelines and inspiration to accelerate the development of high-performance hydrated
                               salt composites. In particular, the classical theoretical models that predict the dependence
                               of the effective thermal conductivity of organic PCM composites on the intrinsic thermal
                               conductivity of carbon fillers; the shape, size, loading and distribution of carbon fillers;
                               and the formation of connected networks can shed light on the design and construction of
                               inorganic hydrated salt PCM composites [118,119].
                                     So far, the reported thermal conductivity values of the hydrated salt composites are
                               much lower than the expected values. Limited interfacial heat transfer might be the domi-
                               nant factor in this difference due to the inevitable interface resistance between the carbon
                               fillers, and the carbon fillers and the PCM matrix. Most often, diverse thermophysical prop-
                               erties or functionalities have different and even contradictory requirements for the added
                               carbon fillers. For instance, increasing the loading of the carbon fillers can help improve
                               the thermal conductivity of the composites, but it sacrifices the specific latent heat storage
                               capacity. The microstructure and surface chemistry of carbon fillers are two powerful tools
                               we can rely on to design hydrated salt PCM composites and systematically tailor their
                               thermophysical properties. Current findings on the influence of filler parameters, including
                               the morphology, size, shape, loading, surface functional groups and the intrinsic properties
                               of each carbon filler, can be used as inputs to establish a comprehensive model to provide
                               full-picture analyses of the thermophysical properties/performance of carbon-enhanced
                               hydrated salt composites. To this end, advanced simulation tools, such as machine learning
                               techniques, might be able to help accelerate the identification process.
                                     Regarding fabrication methods, most of the investigated approaches are for laboratory-
                               scale trials. Developing suitable preparation techniques and controlling the quality of
                               large-size composites is urgently needed for their subsequent scaled-up manufacturing.
                               After identifying the ideal chemical composition, systematic investigation into the key
                               parameters of the fabrication process, such as the blending rate, the compression pressure,
                               and the impregnation vacuum level, on the homogeneity and repeatability of the PCM
                               composites should be carried out.
                                     To date, the characterization of thermophysical properties has been focused on static
                               macroscale measurements that have been carried out in the short term. Practical applica-
                               tions, such as domestic heating or the thermal management of electronic devices, require
                               evaluation of the performance of PCM composites over long periods and under extreme
                               operation conditions. To meet the application needs, on one hand, more detailed characteri-
                               zation of the heat transfer process and the solid–liquid phase transition behavior at fine
                               scales with tools such as high-speed infrared cameras can provide deeper insights into the
                               governing enhancement mechanisms. On the other hand, carrying out continuous dynamic
                               measurements of the key thermophysical properties of hydrated salt composites over long
                               durations under simulated operation conditions, for example with controlled temperature
                               fluctuations and different humidity levels, can pave the way for the practical application of
                               fabricated composites.
                                     Corrosion has been viewed as another key issue that limits long-term reliability and
                               the practical applications of hydrated salts. Although the corrosion behavior of various
                               hydrated salts in different types of metallic containers have been investigated [120,121],
                               the chemical compatibility between carbon-enhanced hydrated salt composites and con-
                               tainers has rarely been reported. In comparison with pristine hydrated salts, one obvious
                               advantage of the carbon-enhanced composites is that they are leakage-proof, which sig-
                               nificantly reduces the probability for direct contact between the corrosive salts and the
                               containers. Future research directions can be focused on further improving the tightness
                               of the PCM composites or enhancing the corrosion resistance of the container through
                               applying specialized coatings on its surface.
                                     Currently investigated applications are mainly related to the harvesting of renewable
                               thermal energy and temperature control of buildings, electronic devices and human bodies.
                               After overcoming the shortcomings with carbon fillers and achieving long-term stability, it
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                        24 of 28




                                  is anticipated that hydrated salt composites should have the potential for a broader range
                                  of applications beyond what have been explored so far. More interdisciplinary research
                                  and development is encouraged to be carried out to promote widespread applications. For
                                  example, considering the biocompatibility of hydrated salts and their suitable phase change
                                  temperatures, carbon-enhanced hydrated salt PCM composites might find use in popular
                                  biomedical applications, such as therapeutic hypothermia, surgical procedures, regulated
                                  drug delivery, wound dressings, cold chain logistics, medical imaging, hyperthermia
                                  treatment, prosthetics and orthotics, space and military medicine and cardiac and vascular
                                  procedures [122–124].

                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.L. and P.T.; methodology, X.L.; formal analysis, Y.L.
                                  and Y.X. (Yangzhe Xu); investigation, Y.L. and T.H.; resources, Y.X. (Yixuan Xie); data curation, Y.L.;
                                  writing—original draft preparation, Y.L.; writing—review and editing, P.T.; visualization, Y.L. and
                                  P.T.; supervision, P.T.; project administration, P.T.; funding acquisition, P.T. All authors have read and
                                  agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: The authors are sincerely grateful for the support from National Key R&D Program of
                                  China (2022YFA1203100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No: 51873105)
                                  and the Top Young Talents of Ten Thousand Talents Plan.
                                  Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
                                  article, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Sadeghi, G. Energy storage on demand: Thermal energy storage development, materials, design, and integration challenges.
      Energy Storage Mater. 2022, 46, 192–222. [CrossRef]
2.    Odukomaiya, A.; Woods, J.; James, N.; Kaur, S.; Gluesenkamp, K.R.; Kumar, N.; Mumme, S.; Jackson, R.; Prasher, R. Addressing
      energy storage needs at lower cost via on-site thermal energy storage in buildings. Energy Environ. Sci. 2021, 14, 5315–5329.
      [CrossRef]
3.    Aftab, W.; Usman, A.; Shi, J.; Yuan, K.; Qin, M.; Zou, R. Phase change material-integrated latent heat storage systems for
      sustainable energy solutions. Energy Environ. Sci. 2021, 14, 4268–4291. [CrossRef]
4.    Usman, A.; Xiong, F.; Aftab, W.; Qin, M.; Zou, R. Emerging solid-to-solid phase-change materials for thermal-energy harvesting,
      storage, and uilization. Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2202457. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Chen, X.; Gao, H.; Tang, Z.; Dong, W.; Li, A.; Wang, G. Optimization strategies of composite phase change materials for thermal
      energy storage, transfer, conversion and utilization. Energy Environ. Sci. 2020, 13, 4498–4535. [CrossRef]
6.    Shen, Z.; Qin, M.; Xiong, F.; Zou, R.; Zhang, J. Nanocellulose-based composite phase change materials for thermal energy storage:
      Status and challenges. Energy Environ. Sci. 2023, 16, 830–861. [CrossRef]
7.    Matuszek, K.; Kar, M.; Pringle, J.M.; MacFarlane, D.R. Phase change materials for renewable energy sorage at intermediate
      temperatures. Chem. Rev. 2022, 123, 491–514. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    Hua, W.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, X. Research on passive cooling of electronic chips based on PCM: A review. J. Mol. Liq. 2021,
      340, 117183. [CrossRef]
9.    Kaur, I.; Singh, P. Progress in minichannel-based thermal management of lithium-ion batteries. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2023,
      187, 113711. [CrossRef]
10.   Sarbu, I.; Sebarchievici, C. A comprehensive review of thermal energy storage. Sustainability 2018, 10, 191. [CrossRef]
11.   Zhang, N.; Yuan, Y.; Cao, X.; Du, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Gui, Y. Latent heat thermal energy storage systems with solid–liquid phase change
      materials: A review. Adv. Eng. Mater. 2018, 20, 1700753. [CrossRef]
12.   Li, X.; Liu, Y.; Xu, Y.; Tao, P.; Deng, T. Solid–liquid phase change composite materials for direct solar–thermal energy harvesting
      and storage. Acc. Mater. Res. 2023, 4, 484–495. [CrossRef]
13.   Tao, J.; Luan, J.; Liu, Y.; Qu, D.; Yan, Z.; Ke, X. Technology development and application prospects of organic-based phase change
      materials: An overview. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2022, 159, 112175. [CrossRef]
14.   Ali, H.M.; Rehman, T.-u.; Arıcı, M.; Said, Z.; Duraković, B.; Mohammed, H.I.; Kumar, R.; Rathod, M.K.; Buyukdagli, O.; Teggar, M.
      Advances in thermal energy storage: Fundamentals and applications. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 2024, 100, 101109. [CrossRef]
15.   Junaid, M.F.; Rehman, Z.u.; Čekon, M.; Čurpek, J.; Farooq, R.; Cui, H.; Khan, I. Inorganic phase change materials in thermal
      energy storage: A review on perspectives and technological advances in building applications. Energy Build. 2021, 252, 111443.
      [CrossRef]
16.   Kalidasan, B.; Pandey, A.K.; Saidur, R.; Samykano, M.; Tyagi, V.V. Nano additive enhanced salt hydrate phase change materials
      for thermal energy storage. Int. Mater. Rev. 2022, 68, 140–183. [CrossRef]
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                           25 of 28




17.   Li, Y.; Li, C.; Lin, N.; Xie, B.; Zhang, D.; Chen, J. Review on tailored phase change behavior of hydrated salt as phase change
      materials for energy storage. Mater. Today Energy 2021, 22, 100866. [CrossRef]
18.   An, S.; Shi, B.; Jiang, M.; Fu, B.; Song, C.; Tao, P.; Shang, W.; Deng, T. Biological and bioinspired thermal energy regulation and
      utilization. Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 7081–7118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.   Chai, Z.; Fang, M.; Min, X. Composite phase-change materials for photo-thermal conversion and energy storage: A review. Nano
      Energy 2024, 124, 109437. [CrossRef]
20.   Rahimi, E.; Babapoor, A.; Moradi, G.; Kalantary, S.; Monazzam Esmaeelpour, M. Personal cooling garments and phase change
      materials: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2024, 190, 114063. [CrossRef]
21.   Shi, J.; Qin, M.; Aftab, W.; Zou, R. Flexible phase change materials for thermal energy storage. Energy Storage Mater. 2021, 41,
      321–342. [CrossRef]
22.   Safari, A.; Saidur, R.; Sulaiman, F.A.; Xu, Y.; Dong, J. A review on supercooling of phase change materials in thermal energy
      storage systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 70, 905–919. [CrossRef]
23.   Wang, G.; Tang, Z.; Gao, Y.; Liu, P.; Li, Y.; Li, A.; Chen, X. Phase change thermal storage materials for interdisciplinary applications.
      Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 6953–7024. [CrossRef]
24.   Zbair, M.; Bennici, S. Survey summary on salts hydrates and composites used in thermochemical sorption heat storage: A review.
      Energies 2021, 14, 3105. [CrossRef]
25.   Zhao, T.; Zheng, M.; Munis, A.; Hu, J.; Teng, H.; Wei, L. Corrosion behaviours of typical metals in molten hydrate salt of
      Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O − Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O for thermal energy storage. Corros. Eng. Sci. Technol. 2019, 54, 379–388. [CrossRef]
26.   Hung, P.-y.; Lau, K.-t.; Fox, B.; Hameed, N.; Lee, J.H.; Hui, D. Surface modification of carbon fibre using graphene–related
      materials for multifunctional composites. Compos. Part B-Eng. 2018, 133, 240–257. [CrossRef]
27.   Kumar, R.; Samykano, M.; Pandey, A.K.; Kadirgama, K.; Tyagi, V.V. A comparative study on thermophysical properties of
      functionalized and non-functionalized Multi-Walled Carbon Nano Tubes (MWCNTs) enhanced salt hydrate phase change
      material. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2022, 240, 111697.
28.   Huang, J.; Dai, J.; Peng, S.; Wang, T.; Hong, S. Modification on hydrated salt-based phase change composites with carbon fillers
      for electronic thermal management. Int. J. Energy Res. 2019, 43, 3550–3560. [CrossRef]
29.   Wang, M.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, C.; Yu, F. Cascade phase change based on hydrate salt/carbon hybrid aerogel for intelligent battery
      thermal management. J. Energy Storage 2022, 45, 103771. [CrossRef]
30.   Yang, J.; Tang, L.-S.; Bai, L.; Bao, R.-Y.; Liu, Z.-Y.; Xie, B.-H.; Yang, M.-B.; Yang, W. High-performance composite phase change
      materials for energy conversion based on macroscopically three-dimensional structural materials. Mater. Horiz. 2019, 6, 250–273.
      [CrossRef]
31.   Alva, G.; Liu, L.; Huang, X.; Fang, G. Thermal energy storage materials and systems for solar energy applications. Renew. Sustain.
      Energy Rev. 2017, 68, 693–706. [CrossRef]
32.   Zou, T.; Fu, W.; Liang, X.; Wang, S.; Gao, X.; Zhang, Z.; Fang, Y. Preparation and performance of modified calcium chloride
      hexahydrate composite phase change material for air-conditioning cold storage. Int. J. Refrig. 2018, 95, 175–181. [CrossRef]
33.   Yin, C.; Lan, J.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Ran, R.; Shi, L.-Y. Shape-stable hydrated salts/polyacrylamide phase-change organohydrogels
      for smart temperature management. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 21810–21821. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Huo, X.; Xie, D.; Zhao, Z.; Wang, S.; Meng, F. Novel method for microencapsulation of eutectic hydrated salt as a phase change
      material for thermal energy storage. Int. J. Low-Carbon Technol. 2022, 17, 760–767. [CrossRef]
35.   Wang, F.; Zheng, W.; Gou, Y.; Jia, Y.; Li, H. Thermal behaviors of energy storage process of eutectic hydrated salt phase change
      materials modified by Nano-TiO2 . J. Energy Storage 2022, 53, 105077. [CrossRef]
36.   Xi, S.; Wang, L.; Shao, F.; Song, M.; Xie, H.; Yu, W. Ecofriendly chitosan-derived carbon aerogels based eutectic hydrated salts for
      good solar thermal energy storage and corrosion mitigation effect. Energy Build. 2022, 271, 112336. [CrossRef]
37.   Wu, S.; Yan, T.; Kuai, Z.; Pan, W. Thermal conductivity enhancement on phase change materials for thermal energy storage: A
      review. Energy Storage Mater. 2020, 25, 251–295. [CrossRef]
38.   Babu Sanker, S.; Baby, R. Phase change material based thermal management of lithium ion batteries: A review on thermal
      performance of various thermal conductivity enhancers. J. Energy Storage 2022, 50, 104606. [CrossRef]
39.   Pielichowska, K.; Pielichowski, K. Phase change materials for thermal energy storage. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2014, 65, 67–123. [CrossRef]
40.   Khan, Z.; Khan, Z.; Ghafoor, A. A review of performance enhancement of PCM based latent heat storage system within the
      context of materials, thermal stability and compatibility. Energy Convers. Manag. 2016, 115, 132–158. [CrossRef]
41.   Khudhair, A.M.; Farid, M.M. A review on energy conservation in building applications with thermal storage by latent heat using
      phase change materials. Energy Convers. Manag. 2004, 45, 263–275. [CrossRef]
42.   Xie, N.; Huang, Z.; Luo, Z.; Gao, X.; Fang, Y.; Zhang, Z. Inorganic salt hydrate for thermal energy storage. Appl. Sci. 2017, 7, 1317.
      [CrossRef]
43.   Nagano, K.; Mochida, T.; Takeda, S.; Domannski, R.; Rebow, M. Thermal characteristics of manganese (II) nitrate hexahydrate as a
      phase change material for cooling systems. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2003, 22, 229–241. [CrossRef]
44.   Ndukwu, M.C.; Bennamoun, L. Potential of integrating Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O pellets in solar drying system. Drying Technol. 2017, 36,
      1017–1030. [CrossRef]
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                        26 of 28




45.   Tao, W.; Kong, X.; Bao, A.; Fan, C.; Zhang, Y. Preparation and phase change performance of graphene oxide and silica composite
      Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O phase change materials (PCMs) as thermal energy storage materials. Materials 2020, 13, 5186. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
46.   Hasnain, S.M. Review on sustainable thermal energy storage technologies, part i: Heat storage materials and techniques. Energy
      Convers. Manag. 1998, 39, 1127–1138. [CrossRef]
47.   Hirano, S.; Saitoh, T.S.; Oya, M.; Yamazaki, M. Temperature dependence of thermophysical properties of disodium hydrogen-
      phosphate dodecahydrate. J. Thermophys. Heat Transfer 2001, 15, 340–346. [CrossRef]
48.   Voigt, W.; Zeng, D. Solid–liquid equilibria in mixtures of molten salt hydrates for the design of heat storage materials. Pure Appl.
      Chem. 2002, 74, 1909–1920. [CrossRef]
49.   Haldorai, S.; Gurusamy, S.; Pradhapraj, M. A review on thermal energy storage systems in solar air heaters. Int. J. Energy Res.
      2019, 43, 6061–6077. [CrossRef]
50.   Paris, J.; Falardeau, M.; Villeneuve, C. Thermal storage by latent heat: A viable option for energy conservation in buildings.
      Energy Sources 2007, 15, 85–93. [CrossRef]
51.   Mao, J.; Hou, P.; Liu, R.; Chen, F.; Dong, X. Preparation and thermal properties of SAT-CMC-DSP/EG composite as phase change
      material. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2017, 119, 585–592. [CrossRef]
52.   Farid, M.M.; Khudhair, A.M.; Razack, S.A.K.; Al-Hallaj, S. A review on phase change energy storage: Materials and applications.
      Energy Convers. Manag. 2004, 45, 1597–1615. [CrossRef]
53.   Zalba, B.; Marín, J.; Cabeza, F.L.; Mehling, H. Review on thermal energy storage with phase change: Materials, heat transfer
      analysis and applications. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2003, 23, 251–283. [CrossRef]
54.   Yan, T.S.; Li, T.X.; Xu, J.X.; Chao, J.W. Understanding the transition process of phase change and dehydration reaction of salt
      hydrate for thermal energy storage. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2020, 166, 114655. [CrossRef]
55.   Sakurai, K.; Sano, K. Mechanism of electrical nucleation in a latent heat storage device with supercooled aqueous solution of
      sodium acetate trihydrate. J. Cryst. Growth 2019, 516, 21–33. [CrossRef]
56.   Sun, M.; Liu, T.; Li, M.; Liu, T.; Wang, X.; Chen, G.; Jiang, D. Experimental and molecular dynamic simulation of supercooling
      phenomenon of sodium acetate trihydrate. J. Energy Storage 2023, 62, 105857. [CrossRef]
57.   Shamseddine, I.; Pennec, F.; Biwole, P.; Fardoun, F. Supercooling of phase change materials: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.
      2022, 158, 112172. [CrossRef]
58.   Younsi, Z.; Naji, H. A numerical investigation of melting phase change process via the enthalpy-porosity approach: Application
      to hydrated salts. Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transf. 2017, 86, 12–24. [CrossRef]
59.   Ait Ousaleh, H.; Sair, S.; Zaki, A.; Faik, A.; Mirena Igartua, J.; El Bouari, A. Double hydrates salt as sustainable thermochemical
      energy storage materials: Evaluation of dehydration behavior and structural phase transition reversibility. Sol. Energy 2020, 201,
      846–856. [CrossRef]
60.   Fopah Lele, A.; N’Tsoukpoe, K.E.; Osterland, T.; Kuznik, F.; Ruck, W.K.L. Thermal conductivity measurement of thermochemical
      storage materials. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2015, 89, 916–926. [CrossRef]
61.   Vasta, S.; Brancato, V.; La Rosa, D.; Palomba, V.; Restuccia, G.; Sapienza, A.; Frazzica, A. Adsorption heat storage: State-of-the-art
      and future perspectives. Nanomaterials 2018, 8, 522. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.   Sosso, G.C.; Chen, J.; Cox, S.J.; Fitzner, M.; Pedevilla, P.; Zen, A.; Michaelides, A. Crystal nucleation in liquids: Open questions
      and future challenges in molecular dynamics simulations. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 7078–7116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.   Haruki, N.; Horibe, A.; Yamada, Y. Heat storage and release behavior in a thin vessel heat storage unit using salt hydrate latent
      heat storage material. Heat Mass Transfer 2019, 55, 2797–2807. [CrossRef]
64.   Wang, L.; Huang, Y.; Li, L.; Li, Y.; Cheng, X. Binary nitrate molten salt magnetic microcapsules modified with Fe3 O4 -functionalized
      carbon nanotubes for accelerating thermal energy storage. J. Energy Storage 2023, 74, 109394. [CrossRef]
65.   Yu, K.; Jin, B.; Liu, Y.; Li, L. Enhanced thermal conductivity of form-stable phase change materials using carbon nanofiber-
      expanded graphite hybrid structure. Mater. Res. Express 2019, 6, 125503. [CrossRef]
66.   Yuan, K.; Chen, Q.; Ishengoma, J.R.; Cao, W. An orthogonal investigation in pore size effect of EG on thermal properties and
      crystallinity of EG/CaCl2 ·6H2 O composite. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2022, 248, 111980. [CrossRef]
67.   Huang, K.; Li, J.; Luan, X.; Liu, L.; Yang, Z.; Wang, C. Effect of graphene oxide on phase change materials based on disodium
      hydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate for thermal storage. ACS Omega 2020, 5, 15210–15217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.   Xu, X.; Cui, H.; Memon, S.A.; Yang, H.; Tang, W. Development of novel composite PCM for thermal energy storage using
      CaCl2 ·6H2 O with graphene oxide and SrCl2 ·6H2 O. Energy Build. 2017, 156, 163–172. [CrossRef]
69.   Liu, Y.; Yang, Y.; Li, S. Graphene oxide modified hydrate salt hydrogels: Form-stable phase change materials for smart thermal
      management. J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 18134–18143. [CrossRef]
70.   Zhang, X.; Li, X.; Zhou, Y.; Hai, C.; Shen, Y.; Ren, X.; Zeng, J. Enhanced thermal conductivity in a hydrated salt PCM system with
      reduced graphene oxide aqueous dispersion. RSC Adv. 2018, 8, 1022–1029. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.   Cui, H.; Wang, P.; Yang, H.; Xu, T. Design and preparation of salt hydrate/graphene oxide@SiO2 /SiC composites for efficient
      solar thermal utilization. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2022, 236, 111524. [CrossRef]
72.   Wu, S.; Yan, T.; Kuai, Z.; Pan, W. Experimental and numerical study of modified expanded graphite/hydrated salt phase change
      material for solar energy storage. Sol. Energy 2020, 205, 474–486. [CrossRef]
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                      27 of 28




73.   Fang, G.; Zhang, W.; Yu, M.; Meng, K.; Tan, X. Experimental investigation of high performance composite phase change materials
      based on sodium acetate trihydrate for solar thermal energy storage. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2022, 234, 111418. [CrossRef]
74.   Liu, H.; Zheng, Z.; Qian, Z.; Wang, Q.; Wu, D.; Wang, X. Lamellar-structured phase change composites based on biomass-derived
      carbonaceous sheets and sodium acetate trihydrate for high-efficient solar photothermal energy harvest. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol.
      Cells 2021, 229, 111140. [CrossRef]
75.   Kinloch, I.A.; Suhr, J.; Lou, J.; Young, R.J.; Ajayan, P.M. Composites with carbon nanotubes and graphene: An outlook. Science
      2018, 362, 547–553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.   Jia, X.; Wei, F. Advances in production and applications of carbon nanotubes. Top. Curr. Chem. 2017, 375, 18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.   Zhang, S.; Ma, Y.; Suresh, L.; Hao, A.; Bick, M.; Tan, S.C.; Chen, J. Carbon nanotube reinforced strong carbon matrix composites.
      ACS Nano 2020, 14, 9282–9319. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.   Gupta, N.; Kumar, A.; Dhasmana, H.; Kumar, A.; Verma, A.; Shukla, P.; Jain, V.K. Effect of shape and size of carbon materials on
      the thermophysical properties of magnesium nitrate hexahydrate for solar thermal energy storage applications. J. Energy Storage
      2021, 41, 102899. [CrossRef]
79.   Cheng, J.; Sheng, M.; Zeng, L.; Su, H.; Li, W.; Li, X.; Xia, F. Thermal energy storage properties of carbon nanotubes/sodium acetate
      trihydrate/sodium monohydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate composite phase-change materials as promising heat storage
      materials. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2023, 228, 120469. [CrossRef]
80.   Zhu, X.; Han, L.; Lu, Y.; Wei, F.; Jia, X. Geometry-induced thermal storage enhancement of shape-stabilized phase change
      materials based on oriented carbon nanotubes. Appl. Energy 2019, 254, 113688. [CrossRef]
81.   Zhou, W.; Jiang, J.; Wu, H.; Hu, D.; Li, P.; Yang, X.; Jia, X. Facile preparation of binary salt hydrates/carbon nanotube composite
      for thermal storage materials with enhanced structural stability. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2021, 4, 4561–4569. [CrossRef]
82.   Sun, W.; Liang, G.; Feng, F.; He, H.; Gao, Z. Study on sodium acetate trihydrate-expand graphite-carbon nanotubes composite
      phase change materials with enhanced thermal conductivity for waste heat recovery. J. Energy Storage 2022, 55, 105857. [CrossRef]
83.   Ding, C.; Liu, L.; Ma, F.; Chen, F.; Zhang, S.; Sun, T. Enhancing the heat storage performance of a Na2 HPO4 ·12H2 O system via
      introducing multiwalled carbon nanotubes. ACS Omega 2021, 6, 29091–29099. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.   Tang, A.; Chen, W.; Shao, X.; Jin, Y.; Li, J.; Xia, D. Experimental investigation of aluminum nitride/carbon fiber-modified
      composite phase change materials for battery thermal management. Int. J. Energy Res. 2022, 46, 12737–12757. [CrossRef]
85.   Chen, F.; Liu, X.; Wang, Z.; Tie, S.; Wang, C.-A. Hierarchically porous CMC/rGO/CNFs aerogels for leakage-proof mirabilite
      phase change materials with superior energy thermal storage. Front. Mater. Sci. 2022, 16, 220619. [CrossRef]
86.   Ndagijimana, P.; Rong, H.; Ndokoye, P.; Mwizerwa, J.P.; Nkinahamira, F.; Luo, S.; Guo, D.; Cui, B. A review on activated
      carbon/graphene composite-based materials: Synthesis and applications. J. Cleaner Prod. 2023, 417, 138006. [CrossRef]
87.   Xi, S.; Wang, L.; Xie, H.; Yu, W. Superhydrophilic modified elastomeric RGO aerogel based hydrated salt phase change materials
      for effective solar thermal conversion and storage. ACS Nano 2022, 16, 3843–3851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.   Mehrali, M.; ten Elshof, J.E.; Shahi, M.; Mahmoudi, A. Simultaneous solar-thermal energy harvesting and storage via shape
      stabilized salt hydrate phase change material. Chem. Eng. J. 2021, 405, 126624. [CrossRef]
89.   Kim, T.Y.; Park, C.-H.; Marzari, N. The electronic thermal conductivity of graphene. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 2439–2443. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
90.   Murugan, P.; Nagarajan, R.D.; Shetty, B.H.; Govindasamy, M.; Sundramoorthy, A.K. Recent trends in the applications of thermally
      expanded graphite for energy storage and sensors—A review. Nanoscale Adv. 2021, 3, 6294–6309. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.   Li, Z.; Huang, Z.; Xie, N.; Gao, X.; Fang, Y.; Zhang, Z. Preparation of Al2 O3 -coated expanded graphite with enhanced hydrophilic-
      ity and oxidation resistance. Ceram. Int. 2018, 44, 16256–16264. [CrossRef]
92.   Wu, N.; Liu, L.; Yang, Z.; Wu, Y.; Li, J. Design of eutectic hydrated salt composite phase change material with cement for thermal
      energy regulation of buildings. Materials 2020, 14, 139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.   Li, C.; Zhang, B.; Xie, B.; Zhao, X.; Chen, J. Tailored phase change behavior of Na2 SO4 ·10H2 O/expanded graphite composite for
      thermal energy storage. Energy Convers. Manag. 2020, 208, 112586. [CrossRef]
94.   Fu, W.; Lu, Y.; Zhang, R.; Liu, J.; Zhang, T. Developing NaAc·3H2 O-based composite phase change material using glycine as
      temperature regulator and expanded graphite as supporting material for use in floor radiant heating. J. Mol. Liq. 2020, 317, 113932.
      [CrossRef]
95.   Jiang, T.; Zhang, Y.; Olayiwola, S.; Lau, C.; Fan, M.; Ng, K.; Tan, G. Biomass-derived porous carbons support in phase change
      materials for building energy efficiency: A review. Mater. Today Energy 2022, 23, 100905. [CrossRef]
96.   Wang, T.; Cui, W.; Li, X.; Ma, T.; Wang, Q. Economical and shape-stabilized hydrated salt/bagasse biomass-derived carbon phase
      change composite for thermal energy storage. J. Energy Storage 2024, 85, 111083. [CrossRef]
97.   Kim, Y.U.; Yun, B.Y.; Nam, J.; Choi, J.Y.; Wi, S.; Kim, S. Evaluation of thermal properties of phase change material-integrated
      artificial stone according to biochar loading content. Const. Build. Mater. 2021, 305, 124682. [CrossRef]
98.   Yang, R.; Guo, X.; Wu, H.; Kang, W.; Song, K.; Li, Y.; Huang, X.; Wang, G. Anisotropic hemp-stem-derived biochar supported
      phase change materials with efficient solar-thermal energy conversion and storage. Biochar 2022, 4, 38. [CrossRef]
99.   Bennici, S.; Dutournié, P.; Cathalan, J.; Zbair, M.; Nguyen, M.H.; Scuiller, E.; Vaulot, C. Heat storage: Hydration investigation of
      MgSO4 /active carbon composites, from material development to domestic applications scenarios. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.
      2022, 158, 112197. [CrossRef]
Nanomaterials 2024, 14, 1077                                                                                                        28 of 28




100. Xin, Y.; Nian, H.; Li, J.; Zhao, J.; Tan, X.; Zhou, Y.; Zhu, F.; Liu, H.; Li, X. Effect of NiCo2 O4 -modified expanded graphite on heat
     transfer and storage improvement of CaCl2 ·6H2 O. J. Energy Storage 2022, 46, 103902. [CrossRef]
101. Shao, F.; Wang, L.; Luo, R.; Yu, W.; Xu, H.; Xie, H. Optimized on melamine sponges for highly stable and efficient hydrated
     salt-based solar thermal energy storage. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 2023, 34, 1268. [CrossRef]
102. Li, X.; Liu, Y.; Xu, Y.; Hu, T.; Fu, B.; Song, C.; Shang, W.; Tao, P.; Deng, T. Rapid large-capacity storage of renewable solar-
     /electro-thermal energy within phase-change materials by bioinspired multifunctional meshes. Matter 2023, 6, 4050–4065.
     [CrossRef]
103. Tao, P.; Chang, C.; Tong, Z.; Bao, H.; Song, C.; Wu, J.; Shang, W.; Deng, T. Magnetically-accelerated large-capacity solar-thermal
     energy storage within high-temperature phase-change materials. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 1613–1621. [CrossRef]
104. Wang, Z.; Tong, Z.; Ye, Q.; Hu, H.; Nie, X.; Yan, C.; Shang, W.; Song, C.; Wu, J.; Wang, J.; et al. Dynamic tuning of optical absorbers
     for accelerated solar-thermal energy storage. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1478. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Jaguemont, J.; Boulon, L.; Dubé, Y. A comprehensive review of lithium-ion batteries used in hybrid and electric vehicles at cold
     temperatures. Appl. Energy 2016, 164, 99–114. [CrossRef]
106. Luo, H.; Wang, Y.; Feng, Y.-H.; Fan, X.-Y.; Han, X.; Wang, P.-F. Lithium-ion batteries under low-temperature environment:
     Challenges and prospects. Materials 2022, 15, 8166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Chombo, P.V.; Laoonual, Y. A review of safety strategies of a Li-ion battery. J. Power Sources 2020, 478, 228649. [CrossRef]
108. Cheng, Y.; Wang, C.; Kang, F.; He, Y.-B. Self-healable lithium-ion batteries: A review. Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 3656. [CrossRef]
     [PubMed]
109. Cao, J.; Ling, Z.; Lin, S.; He, Y.; Fang, X.; Zhang, Z. Thermochemical heat storage system for preventing battery thermal runaway
     propagation using sodium acetate trihydrate/expanded graphite. Chem. Eng. J. 2022, 433, 133536. [CrossRef]
110. Ling, Z.; Li, S.; Cai, C.; Lin, S.; Fang, X.; Zhang, Z. Battery thermal management based on multiscale encapsulated inorganic
     phase change material of high stability. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2021, 193, 117002. [CrossRef]
111. Li, R.; Shi, Y.; Wu, M.; Hong, S.; Wang, P. Photovoltaic panel cooling by atmospheric water sorption–evaporation cycle. Nat.
     Sustain. 2020, 3, 636–643. [CrossRef]
112. Song, M.; Wang, L.; Shao, F.; Xie, H.; Xu, H.; Yu, W. Thermally induced flexible phase change hydrogels for solar thermal storage
     and human thermal management. Chem. Eng. J. 2023, 464, 142682. [CrossRef]
113. Sun, W.; Zhang, Y.; Ling, Z.; Fang, X.; Zhang, Z. Experimental investigation on the thermal performance of double-layer PCM
     radiant floor system containing two types of inorganic composite PCMs. Energy Build. 2020, 211, 109806. [CrossRef]
114. Liu, Q.; Zhang, J.; Liu, J.; Sun, W.; Xu, H.; Liu, C. Self-healed inorganic phase change materials for thermal energy harvesting and
     management. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2023, 219, 119423. [CrossRef]
115. Aftab, W.; Huang, X.; Wu, W.; Liang, Z.; Mahmood, A.; Zou, R. Nanoconfined phase change materials for thermal energy
     applications. Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11, 1392–1424. [CrossRef]
116. Wu, M.Q.; Wu, S.; Cai, Y.F.; Wang, R.Z.; Li, T.X. Form-stable phase change composites: Preparation, performance, and applications
     for thermal energy conversion, storage and management. Energy Storage Mater. 2021, 42, 380–417. [CrossRef]
117. Yang, J.; Shen, X.; Yang, W.; Kim, J.K. Templating strategies for 3D-structured thermally conductive composites: Recent advances
     and thermal energy applications. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2023, 133, 101054. [CrossRef]
118. Li, S.-Z.; Zhou, Y.-C.; Wang, L.-N.; Wang, S.-P.; Bai, L.; Feng, C.-P.; Bao, R.-Y.; Yang, J.; Yang, M.-B.; Yang, W. Flexible composite
     phase change materials with enhanced thermal conductivity and mechanical performance for thermal management. J. Mater.
     Chem. A 2023, 11, 18832–18842. [CrossRef]
119. Paul, J.; Pandey, A.K.; Mishra, Y.N.; Said, Z.; Mishra, Y.K.; Ma, Z.; Jacob, J.; Kadirgama, K.; Samykano, M.; Tyagi, V.V. Nano-
     enhanced organic form stable PCMs for medium temperature solar thermal energy harvesting: Recent progresses, challenges,
     and opportunities. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2022, 161, 112321. [CrossRef]
120. Dixit, P.; Reddy, V.J.; Parvate, S.; Balwani, A.; Singh, J.; Maiti, T.K.; Dasari, A.; Chattopadhyay, S. Salt hydrate phase change
     materials: Current state of art and the road ahead. J. Energy Storage 2022, 51, 104360. [CrossRef]
121. Solé, A.; Miró, L.; Barreneche, C.; Martorell, I.; Cabeza, L.F. Corrosion of metals and salt hydrates used for thermochemical energy
     storage. Renew. Energy 2015, 75, 519–523. [CrossRef]
122. Cao, C.; Yang, N.; Dai, H.; Huang, H.; Song, X.; Zhang, Q.; Dong, X. Recent advances in phase change material based
     nanoplatforms for cancer therapy. Nanoscale Adv. 2021, 3, 106–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Chen, B.-Q.; Pan, Y.-J.; Zhang, D.-G.; Xia, H.-Y.; Kankala, R.K. Phase-change materials-based platforms for biomedicine. Front.
     Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2022, 10, 989953. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Dai, Y.; Su, J.; Wu, K.; Ma, W.; Wang, B.; Li, M.; Sun, P.; Shen, Q.; Wang, Q.; Fan, Q. Multifunctional thermosensitive liposomes
     based on natural phase-change material: Near-infrared light-triggered drug release and multimodal imaging-guided cancer
     combination therapy. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 10540–10553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
