             materials
Article
Towards Investigating the Effect of Ammonium Nitrate on the
Characteristics and Thermal Decomposition Behavior of
Energetic Double Base NC/DEGDN Composite
Hani Boukeciat 1 , Ahmed Fouzi Tarchoun 1,2, * , Djalal Trache 1, * , Amir Abdelaziz 1 , Rania Ahmed Hamada 1 ,
Ayemen Bouhantala 1 , Chamseddine Bousstila 1 , Sabrina Hanafi 1 , Mohammed Dourari 1
and Thomas M. Klapötke 3

                                          1   Energetic Materials Laboratory (EMLab), Teaching and Research Unit of Energetic Processes, Ecole Militaire
                                              Polytechnique, BP 17, Bordj El-Bahri, Algiers 16046, Algeria
                                          2   Energetic Propulsion Laboratory, Teaching and Research Unit of Energetic Processes, Ecole Militaire
                                              Polytechnique, BP 17, Bordj El-Bahri, Algiers 16046, Algeria
                                          3   Department of Chemistry, Ludwig Maximilian University, Butenandtstrasse 5-13 (D),
                                              D-81377 Munich, Germany
                                          *   Correspondence: tarchounfouzi@gmail.com (A.F.T.); djalaltrache@gmail.com (D.T.)


                                          Abstract: This research work aimed to elaborate on a new modified double-base propellant contain-
                                          ing nitrocellulose (NC), ammonium nitrate (AN), and diethylene glycol dinitrate (DEGDN). The
                                          developed AN/NC-DEGDN formulation was successfully obtained through a casting process and
Citation: Boukeciat, H.; Tarchoun,        fully characterized in terms of its chemical structure, morphological features, and thermal behavior.
A.F.; Trache, D.; Abdelaziz, A.;          Beforehand, theoretical calculation by the CEA-NASA program was applied to select the optimal
Ahmed Hamada, R.; Bouhantala, A.;         composition of the formulation. Experimental findings demonstrated the homogenous dispersion of
Bousstila, C.; Hanafi, S.; Dourari, M.;   AN oxidizer in the NC-DEGDN matrix without alteration of their molecular structures. The catalytic
Klapötke, T.M. Towards Investigating      influence of AN on the thermal decomposition behavior of NC-DEGDN film was also elucidated
the Effect of Ammonium Nitrate on
                                          by thermal analyses. When AN was incorporated into the formulation, the decomposition peak
the Characteristics and Thermal
                                          temperatures for the different decomposition processes were shifted toward lower temperatures,
Decomposition Behavior of Energetic
                                          while the total enthalpy of decomposition increased by around 1272.24 J/g. In addition, the kinetics of
Double Base NC/DEGDN
                                          the thermal decomposition of the developed modified double base propellant were investigated using
Composite. Materials 2022, 15, 8138.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                          DSC results coupled with model kinetic approaches. It was found that the addition of AN decreases
ma15228138                                the activation energy of nitrate esters from 134.5 kJ/mol to 118.84 kJ/mol, providing evidence for its
                                          excellent catalytic effect. Overall, this investigation could serve as a reference for developing future
Academic Editor: Aleksander B.
                                          generation of modified double-base propellants.
Vorozhtsov

Received: 25 October 2022                 Keywords: ammonium nitrate; nitrocellulose; diethylene glycol dinitrate; energetic composite;
Accepted: 14 November 2022                decomposition kinetics
Published: 16 November 2022

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affil-   1. Introduction
iations.                                        Nowadays, the development and characterization of new energetic formulations have
                                          addressed numerous challenges in the field of insensitive munitions and solid rocket pro-
                                          pellants [1,2]. As a crucial branch of energetic formulations, modified double-base solid
                                          propellants (MDBs), corresponding to energetic composites that contain cellulose nitrate
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
                                          (NC) as a binder, plasticizers, oxidizers (ammonium perchlorate, AP), energetic additives
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          (e.g., nitramines), stabilizers, and catalysts, among others, play a prominent role in chemical
This article is an open access article
                                          propulsion systems [3]. Such energetic formulations are known for their excellent energetic
distributed under the terms and
                                          performance, interesting mechanical characteristics, attractive operational features, and
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                          mature processing technology, increasing their demand for several military uses in missiles,
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          rocket motors, and boosters [4]. As an important ingredient in MDBs, energetic plasticizers
4.0/).
                                          such as nitroglycerine (NG), diethylene glycol dinitrate (DEGDN) and ethylene glycol




Materials 2022, 15, 8138. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma15228138                                                https://www.mdpi.com/journal/materials
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                            2 of 14




                           dinitrate (EGDN) act as a fuel and improve the overall energy level, plasticity, and physical
                           characteristics of the propellant [5,6]. Broadly, an appropriate plasticizer should display ac-
                           ceptable sensitivity, compatibility with other components, suitable melting point, and good
                           density [6]. Nonetheless, nitroglycerine, the most largely employed energetic plasticizer,
                           suffers from various problems, including sensitivity to friction and impact, low oxygen
                           balance (3.5%), reduced thermal stability, and migratory issues [7–9]. To address the above-
                           mentioned issues associated with traditional NG reliance, several emergent plasticizers
                           comprising DEGDN and EGDN are revealed as promising candidates to replace NG, owing
                           to their inherent characteristics such as improved participation and wetting features that
                           lead to softer boundaries at NC interfaces, thus decreasing the sensitivity of the energetic
                           formulation. Furthermore, they can decrease the freezing temperature of nitroglycerine [10].
                           As an energetic plasticizer, EGDN was found to be more effective than NG and present high
                           energy, while being less sensitive to impact [11]. In one research paper, Yunlu Li et al. [6]
                           mentioned that the introduction of hydrogen bond functional groups such as -NH2 , -CH3,
                           or other functions into energetic compounds would enhance their safety. Therefore, the
                           use of DEGDN, which forms homogenous matrices with NC promoted by the electrostatic
                           N–O interactions and the hydrogen bond network, has actually attracted much attention as
                           a prominent alternative plasticizer in energetic formulations [8,9]. However, such propel-
                           lant formulations (NC-DEGDN) demonstrate reduced energetic performance due to their
                           low oxygen balance [10]. To address this issue, oxidizers such as ammonium perchlorate
                           (AP), hydrazinium nitroformate (HNF), ammonium nitrate (AN), ammonium dinitramide
                           (ADN), and hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane (CL-20) were introduced to the double-base
                           energetic formulation to compensate the oxygen deficiency and allow producing effective
                           propellant composites with better energetic performance [12]. MDBs based on nitrate esters
                           (NC and NG) and AP as an oxidizer have been widely employed for military purposes
                           owing to their high oxygen balance of 34% [12]. Nevertheless, the use of AP causes serious
                           problems of toxicity and corrosiveness due to the released hydrochloric acid (HCl) [12,13].
                           Therefore, AN is actually used in most composite propellants to replace AP owing to its
                           low cost, its coating, the effect of additives, its applications and usability [12,14,15]. In
                           addition, the good thermal stability of AN and its ability to form homogenous systems with
                           NC and DEGDN motivated us to explore this new composite-modified double-base solid
                           propellant [7,16]. To the best of our knowledge, MDBs based on nitrocellulose, diethylene
                           glycol dinitrate and ammonium nitrate have never been studied. Therefore, investigation
                           of the characteristics and thermal behavior that occur within such energetic composites is
                           crucial for developing future generations of modified double-base propellants.
                                 The main purpose of the present investigation was to elucidate the potential effect
                           of AN on the characteristics and thermo-kinetic decomposition of NC-DEGDN. The en-
                           ergetic composite of AN/NC-DEGDN was firstly optimized using NASA-CEA software,
                           where the specific impulse was calculated. The characteristics of the optimized energetic
                           composite were characterized using, respectively, scanning electron microscopy (SEM),
                           Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and an electronic densimeter. The ther-
                           mal features of AN/NC-DEGDN were evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
                           and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The kinetic triplet, namely, the activation
                           energy, the pre-exponential factor, and the best reaction model were also predicted based
                           on isoconversional kinetic methods.

                           2. Experimental Section
                           2.1. Materials
                                AN powder used in the present research was commercial grade purchased from
                           Prolabo. Cellulose nitrate (NC) with a nitrogen content of 12.68% was prepared following
                           the method detailed in our recent studies [17,18]. All other reactants and solvents were of
                           analytical grade and were used without further purification.
                           method detailed in our recent studies [17,18]. All other reactants and solvents were of
                           analytical grade and were used without further purification.

                           2.2. Preparation of DEGDN Plasticizer
Materials 2022, 15, 8138          The preparation method for DEGDN was inspired by the study of Yahya et                     3 ofal.,
                                                                                                                                  14 with
                           some modifications [9]. Briefly, the sulfonitric acid was prepared by dropwise addition of
                           nitric acid (8 mL, 99%) to sulfuric acid (8 mL, 98%). The obtained acid mixture was cooled
                           to 52.2.
                                 °C,Preparation
                                      and a certain    amount
                                                 of DEGDN          of dichloromethane (60 mL) was added. After that, diethy-
                                                              Plasticizer
                           lene glycol     (DEG) (0.04
                                     The preparation       mol) for
                                                        method     wasDEGDN
                                                                         slowlywas
                                                                                 poured,    under
                                                                                     inspired      stirring,
                                                                                              by the study ofinto
                                                                                                              Yahyatheetsolution.
                                                                                                                         al., with The
                           mixture
                               some modifications [9]. Briefly, the sulfonitric acid was prepared by dropwise addition ofwhile
                                       was   then  stirred   for  35 min.   Next,  the bottom   acidic  phase  was   removed,
                           thenitric
                                organic     phase
                                      acid (8       was to
                                              mL, 99%)    rinsed,   respectively,
                                                             sulfuric               withThe
                                                                       acid (8 mL, 98%).   water, sodium
                                                                                              obtained acid bicarbonate,     10% urea,
                                                                                                            mixture was cooled
                                  5 ◦ C, andchloride.
                           andtosodium                  It is important
                                             a certain amount               to mention
                                                                 of dichloromethane   (60that
                                                                                          mL) after each stage
                                                                                               was added.        of purification,
                                                                                                           After that, diethylene our
                               glycol (DEG)
                           solution            (0.04 mol)
                                        was shaken,     andwasonly
                                                                 slowly
                                                                      thepoured,
                                                                           lower under
                                                                                  phasestirring, into the solution.
                                                                                           was recuperated.         Thethe
                                                                                                               Lastly,    mixture
                                                                                                                               resulting
                           product was filtered using a rotary evaporator (Laborota 4000, Heidolph, organic
                              was   then  stirred for 35 min.  Next,   the bottom  acidic phase was removed,   while  the Schwabach,
                               phase was rinsed, respectively, with water, sodium bicarbonate, 10% urea, and sodium
                           Germany).       The purity of the obtained DEGDN was 99.9%.
                              chloride. It is important to mention that after each stage of purification, our solution was
                              shaken, and only the lower phase was recuperated. Lastly, the resulting product was
                           2.3.filtered
                                 Evaluation   of the Theoretical Performance of CSPs
                                        using a rotary evaporator (Laborota 4000, Heidolph, Schwabach, Germany). The
                                  Before
                              purity       proceeding
                                       of the           to the formulation
                                              obtained DEGDN     was 99.9%. of the energetic composite, an evaluation of the
                           theoretical performance was performed using NASA Chemical Equilibrium with Appli-
                              2.3. Evaluation of the Theoretical Performance of CSPs
                           cations   (CEA) thermochemical software in order to select the ideal composition [19]. It is
                                    Before
                           interesting     to proceeding
                                              mention that to the formulationrecently
                                                               Bondarchuk        of the energetic
                                                                                           developedcomposite,
                                                                                                           a newan    evaluation
                                                                                                                   approach     toof  the
                                                                                                                                    perform   a
                              theoretical performance was performed using NASA Chemical Equilibrium with Appli-
                           preliminary crude estimation of the detonation performance of a C-H-N-O energetic ma-
                              cations (CEA) thermochemical software in order to select the ideal composition [19]. It is
                           terial without quantum-chemical calculations [20]. The proposed method can be also ef-
                              interesting to mention that Bondarchuk recently developed a new approach to perform
                           fectively   used tocrude
                              a preliminary       design   new energetic
                                                        estimation            materials or
                                                                      of the detonation       modify existing
                                                                                            performance              ones. energetic
                                                                                                             of a C-H-N-O
                                 In the without
                              material     case of quantum-chemical
                                                    solid rocket propellants,        specific
                                                                           calculations   [20].impulse      is considered
                                                                                                 The proposed      method can a crucial
                                                                                                                                 be also ener-
                           getic  performance
                              effectively    used toparameter
                                                     design newto     measure
                                                                    energetic     the efficiency
                                                                               materials   or modifyof existing
                                                                                                        a rocketones.
                                                                                                                    motor. Therefore, this
                           parameter,
                                    In thewhich
                                             case ofcan  reach
                                                     solid       high
                                                            rocket      values when
                                                                     propellants,        theimpulse
                                                                                    specific  ratio between       flamea temperature
                                                                                                        is considered       crucial ener- and
                           thegetic  performance
                               combustion             parameter
                                                product’s     molarto mass
                                                                      measure   the efficiency
                                                                            increases,    is used ofas
                                                                                                     a rocket   motor.criterion.
                                                                                                        a selection      Therefore,
                                                                                                                                  Thethis
                                                                                                                                        MDBP
                              parameter,     which   can  reach  high  values   when   the  ratio  between
                           composition was optimized and simulated with AN as an oxidizer and NC/DEGDN as a   flame   temperature    and
                              the combustion product’s molar mass increases, is used as a selection criterion. The MDBP
                           matrix.   It is worth noting that the percentage of DEGDN used in this research ranged from
                              composition was optimized and simulated with AN as an oxidizer and NC/DEGDN as a
                           5% to 30% in order to put the system on a scale and select the maximal specific impulse.
                              matrix. It is worth noting that the percentage of DEGDN used in this research ranged from
                           The5%chemical
                                  to 30% instructures
                                               order to putofthethe  studied
                                                                 system   on a samples     are shown
                                                                               scale and select           in Figure
                                                                                                  the maximal           1a,impulse.
                                                                                                                 specific   whereasThe the ob-
                           tained  findings
                              chemical          corresponding
                                           structures               to the
                                                       of the studied      calculated
                                                                        samples          specific
                                                                                   are shown        impulse
                                                                                                in Figure       (Isp) are illustrated
                                                                                                            1a, whereas    the obtained in Fig-
                           urefindings
                                1b.       corresponding to the calculated specific impulse (Isp ) are illustrated in Figure 1b.




                              Figure 1. (a) Chemical structures of AN, NC, and DEGDN. (b) Variation of the specific im-
                              pulse of AN/NC-DEGDN formulation versus the mass fraction of AN. (c) AN/NC-DEGDN film.
                              (d) Elaboration process of AN/NC-DEGDN formulation.
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                             4 of 14




                           2.4. Elaboration of AN/NC-DEGDN Propellant
                                The dried nitrocellulose was firstly solubilized in acetone for 30 min at room tempera-
                           ture. After that, DEGDN was introduced to the mixture under stirring for 15 min. Then,
                           AN was slowly included in the NC-DEGDN mixture. Next, the mixture was placed in a
                           Petri dish to allow the solvent’s evaporation and dried at 60 ◦ C. The weight fractions of
                           the compounds used to prepare our MDBP, which represented the optimal composition
                           calculated using the CEA program, were equal to 60% AN, 10% NC, and 30% DEGDN. The
                           elaboration pathway is presented in Figure 1d, while a digital image of the as-prepared
                           MDBP is depicted in Figure 1c.

                           2.5. Characterization Methods
                                A scanning electron microscope (SEM) apparatus (model FEI Quanta 60, Hillsboro,
                           Oregon, USA), through a secondary electron detector at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV, was
                           used to examine the surface morphology and the homogeneity of the different samples. A
                           Perkin Elmer spectrometer (Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) was used to study the chemical
                           structure using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) at ambient temperature in
                           the wavenumber range of 4000 to 400 cm−1 . All FTIR spectra were captured in ATR mode
                           with an accumulation of 64 scans and a resolution of 4 cm−1 . Thermal characteristics of
                           the investigated samples were elucidated by Perkin-Elmer TGA 8000 analyzers (Waltham,
                           Massachusetts, USA). After sample drying, a sample mass of 0.8–1 mg was analyzed in the
                           temperature range of 50 ◦ C to 500 ◦ C at a heating rate of 10 ◦ C/min. All measurements were
                           recorded under a constant nitrogen atmosphere (30 mL/min) to prevent oxidation effects.
                           In order to evaluate the thermo-kinetic factors of the developed MDBP, differential scanning
                           calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed on a Perkin-Elmer DSC 8000 analyzer
                           (Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) for approximately 1 mg specimens at different heating
                           rates (5, 10, 15, and 20 ◦ C/min) under nitrogen atmosphere from 50 ◦ C to 350 ◦ C.

                           2.6. Kinetic Modeling
                                A kinetic evaluation was carried out by applying isoconversional kinetic analysis
                           to the non-isothermal DSC data in order to better understand the thermal behavior of
                           the developed AN/NC-DEGDN propellant. According to the recommendations of the
                           International Confederation for Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry (ICTAC), at constant
                           conversion (α), the only factor affecting reaction rate is temperature. Basically, the progress
                           of the conversion versus time is given by Equation (1).

                                                                  dα
                                                                     = k( T ) f (α)                                     (1)
                                                                  dT
                           where T refers to the temperature at t instant, k (T) presents the rate constant, and f (α)
                           stands for the differential model. The value of α (0< α <1) can be derived from the peak
                           area of the DSC curves, as the ratio of the current enthalpy ∆H to the total enthalpy ∆H total ,
                           as shown in Equation (2).
                                                                  R t  dH 
                                                                   t0 dt dt        ∆H
                                                            α = Rt   =                                              (2)
                                                                     f  dH
                                                                             dt  ∆H  total
                                                                  t0   dt

                                Two isoconversional linear methods, called Trache-Abdelaziz-Siwani (TAS) [21], it-
                           erative Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose (it-KAS) [22], and Vyazovkin’s non-linear approach
                           combined with the compensation effect method (VYA/CE) [23], were employed to predict
                           the Arrhenius parameters (the activation energy (Ea ) and the preexponential factor (Log
                           (A))) and the most probable mechanism of decomposition (g(α)).
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                                   5 of 14




                                3. Results and Discussions
                                3.1. Evaluation of the Optimal Composition
                                     The theoretical investigation of the energetic properties is important to choose the
                               optimal composition of propellant formulations with the best performance. The main
                               purpose of the current investigation was to determine the impact of AN on the specific
                               impulse (Isp) of the NC/DEGDN formulation. A tertiary variation between the basic
                               constituents, namely DEGDN (5% to 30%) and AN (10% to 60%), was studied. For practical
                               feasibility, a minimum and maximum amount of 5% and 30%, respectively, were considered
                               for DEGDN. It can be revealed from Figure 1b that by varying the weight fraction of the
                               AN/NC-DEGDN compounds within the composite, the values of Isp were determined. It
                               was found that the increase in AN content improved the Isp, which was explained by the
                               rise in oxygen content and the gaseous decomposition of AN [14]. This growth in oxygen
                               balance could also improve the flame temperature [24]. It was also found that the insertion
                               of AN into NC/DEGDN increased the flame temperature from 2625 K for NC/DEGDN
                               (1:3 wt.%) to 2716 K for the optimal AN/NC-DEGDN (60:10:30, wt.%) formulation. This
                               augmentation in the flame temperature promoted the Isp from 244.6 s to 245.9 s. This
                               result suggests that raising the flame temperature can improve the AN/NC-DEGDN
                               formulation’s burning rate, which can be also enhanced by the exothermic processes
                               that happen within the propellant, as demonstrated by DSC. Additionally, it is worth
                               mentioning that the AN content within the prepared MDBP was less than that employed in
                               the standard composite propellants, which broadly ranged between 65–80% [25,26].

                                3.2. Morphology and Chemical Structure
                                         The morphological features and the chemical structure of the as-prepared MDBP were
                                    assessed by scanning electron microscopy and infrared spectroscopy, respectively, and the
                                    obtained findings are illustrated in Figures 2 and 3. It is clear from the first screening of
   Materials 2022, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                 6 of 15
                                    the digital images shown in Figure 2a,b that homogeneous and uniform structures were
                                    formed either with or without the presence of AN.




                                 Figure 2. (a) NC-DEGDN composite film; (b) AN/NC-DEGDN composite film; SEM images of ((c)
                               Figure  2. (a) NC-DEGDN composite film; (b) AN/NC-DEGDN composite film; SEM images of
                                 NC-DEGDN mixture, (d) AN/NC-DEGDN mixture).
                               ((c) NC-DEGDN mixture, (d) AN/NC-DEGDN mixture).
                                      A comparison between the morphologies of the NC-DEGDN and AN/NC-DEGDN
                                 composites is shown in Figure 2c,d. As can be seen, the double-base film without AN
                                 exhibited a uniform structure with a smooth surface, which was referred to as good dis-
                                 solution of NC/DEGDN. Furthermore, the observed sheet structure after the dissolution
                                 pathway was improved by the addition of DEGDN. However, a few holes on the sheet
                           For instance, the bands detected at 3260 cm−1 and 1417 cm−1 were attributed, respectively,
                           to the stretching and bending vibrations of N-H. In addition, the presence of a typical
                           vibrational peak of -O-H at 3500 cm−1 confirmed the hydrogen bond interactions between
                           AN and NC-DEGDN [31]. Besides that, there were no alterations in the chemical struc-
Materials 2022, 15, 8138
                           tures of AN or NC-DEGDN as originated by the preparation pathway, providing evidence6 of 14
                           for good chemical compatibility between the different energetic compounds and confirm-
                           ing the successful elaboration of the desired composites.




                           Figure  3. (a)
                           Figure 3.   (a) FTIR
                                           FTIRspectra
                                                   spectraofofDEGDN,
                                                              DEGDN,NC/DEGDN,
                                                                      NC/DEGDN, and and AN/NC-DEGDN.
                                                                                         AN/NC-DEGDN. (b)   (b) TG-DTG
                                                                                                                TG-DTG profiles
                                                                                                                         profiles of
                                                                                                                                  of
                           mixtures          ◦ C/min. (c) DSC thermograms of the different samples at different heating rates of 5,
                           mixtures atat 10
                                         10 °C/min.     (c) DSC thermograms of the different samples at different heating rates of 5,
                           10,
                           10, 15
                               15and
                                  and20 20◦°C/min.
                                            C/min. (d) Mathematical deconvolution
                                                                       deconvolution of
                                                                                      of the
                                                                                         the DSC
                                                                                             DSC thermogram
                                                                                                  thermogramof  ofAN/NC-DEGDN
                                                                                                                  AN/NC-DEGDN
                           formulation at
                           formulation                ◦ C/min.
                                           at ββ = 10 °C/min.

                                A comparison between the morphologies of the NC-DEGDN and AN/NC-DEGDN
                           composites is shown in Figure 2c,d. As can be seen, the double-base film without AN exhib-
                           ited a uniform structure with a smooth surface, which was referred to as good dissolution
                           of NC/DEGDN. Furthermore, the observed sheet structure after the dissolution pathway
                           was improved by the addition of DEGDN. However, a few holes on the sheet surface
                           could be detected, which was probably caused by small solvent droplets evaporating.
                           Additionally, a few NC aggregates were visible, which was probably due to the intermolec-
                           ular interactions between the NC fibers. Figure 2c,d shows the difference in morphology
                           after the introduction of AN. It was found that when AN microparticles were added, the
                           smooth surface disappeared, which was evenly distributed throughout the NC-DEGDN
                           film or surface-coated in. Such efficient dispersion can improve the interfacial interactions
                           among the compounds and is expected to promote the decomposition temperatures of the
                           energetic formulation.
                                To appreciate what was previously stated, an important parameter called density
                           must be measured. According to the current trend in energetic materials, high densities
                           lead to better energy performance and a high burning rate. For each sample, to assess
                           their experimental densities, 10 analyses were carried out to determine the average density
                           and standard deviation with an electronic Accupyc 1340 II densimeter. It was revealed
                           that the presence of AN within the NC-DEGDN film provided an increased density of
                           1.5872 ± 0.0013 g/cm3 with respect to the NC-DEGDN formulation, which presented a
                           value of 1.4271 ± 0.0054 g/cm3 . This increase in density is expected to enhance the
                           performance of the developed MDBP. In addition, the obtained experimental densities were
                           found to be comparable to their theoretical densities, corresponding to 1.6178 g/cm3 for
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                          7 of 14




                           AN/NC-DEGDN and 1.4570 g/cm3 for NC-DEGDN, thus implying that the open porosity
                           of the designed energetic composites was very low and demonstrating the high loading
                           capacity of the NC-DEGDN formulation. These outcomes agreed well with those obtained
                           by SEM, and highlight the potential advantages of adding AN to develop a promising
                           energetic formulation for advanced applications.
                                FTIR characterization was carried out to elucidate the chemical structure of the de-
                           veloped energetic composites, and the obtained spectra are shown in Figure 3a. It is clear
                           that both composites exhibited a large absorption peak at 2990~2850 cm−1 , which corre-
                           sponded to the stretching vibration of C-H available in NC and DEGDN [27]. The other
                           characteristic bands, observed at 1620 cm−1 , 1270 cm−1 , and 814 cm−1 , were attributed to
                           the asymmetric stretching of the N–O bond in NO2 , the symmetric elongation of -NO2 and
                           the twisting vibration of O–NO2 , respectively [9]. In addition, the absorption band, located
                           at 1114 cm−1 , was assigned to the overlapped vibration of C-O-C [28]. The other bands
                           associated with NC and/or DEGDN were comparable to those mentioned in previous
                           works [19,29,30]. Additional peaks that could be observed when AN was introduced to
                           the NC-DEGDN formulation were related to the characteristic functional groups of this
                           oxidizer. For instance, the bands detected at 3260 cm−1 and 1417 cm−1 were attributed,
                           respectively, to the stretching and bending vibrations of N-H. In addition, the presence of a
                           typical vibrational peak of -O-H at 3500 cm−1 confirmed the hydrogen bond interactions
                           between AN and NC-DEGDN [31]. Besides that, there were no alterations in the chemical
                           structures of AN or NC-DEGDN as originated by the preparation pathway, providing
                           evidence for good chemical compatibility between the different energetic compounds and
                           confirming the successful elaboration of the desired composites.

                           3.3. TGA Characterization
                                 The thermal decomposition features of the developed MDBP formulations were in-
                           vestigated by TGA, and the obtained TGA/DTG thermograms are plotted in Figure 3b.
                           As can be seen, NC-DEGDN composite showed two weight-loss events appearing at
                           DTG peak temperatures of 161.5 ◦ C and 204.6 ◦ C with a weight loss of 34% and 56%,
                           respectively. The first mass loss was mainly induced by the volatilization and decompo-
                           sition of DEGDN [28,32], whereas the second stage of decomposition was attributed to
                           the well-known thermolysis process of nitrocellulose [33]. After the addition of AN, it
                           was evident, as seen in Figure 3b, that the obtained AN/NC-DEGDN composite exhib-
                           ited three decomposition stages. The first step, at 103.5 ◦ C, was mainly caused by water
                           evaporation. The second and the last weight losses, observed at 201.7 ◦ C and 215.5 ◦ C,
                           were related to the decomposition of NC-DEGDN matrix and AN, respectively [34,35]. It
                           is important to note that on reaching 500 ◦ C, both energetic formulations (NC/DEGDN
                           and AN/NC-DEGDN) lost around 90% of their initial weight. In addition, the influence
                           of AN on the thermolysis of the NC-DEGDN composite, as clearly revealed from the
                           presented TGA/DTG thermograms, notably decreased the decomposition temperatures
                           of the obtained AN/NC-DEGDN propellant. Therefore, the first event of NC-DEGDN
                           decomposition was accelerated by the highly reactive products generated during the de-
                           composition of AN oxidizer. Such behavior was also reported by Abd-Elghany et al. [36],
                           who highlighted that the addition of an oxidizer into an NC-based formulation accelerates
                           the thermolysis and the combustion performance. Another interesting finding was that
                           the thermal decomposition of AN was also shifted to a lower temperature (from 260 ◦ C for
                           pure AN to 215.5 ◦ C), which was probably due to the early thermolysis of NC-DEGDN that
                           catalyzed the decomposition of AN. According to the above discussion, we can conclude
                           that the thermal behavior of the developed MDBP was dominated by the decomposition of
                           the NC-DEGDN composite.

                           3.4. DSC Characterization
                                To carefully investigate the influence of AN on the thermal reactivity and enthalpy of
                           the decomposition of NC-DEGDN propellant and elucidate the thermolysis events of the
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                                                                  8 of 14




                                             developed AN/NC-DEGDN formulation, DSC characterizations were also carried out at
                                             four heating rates to identify the exothermic/endothermic decomposition events and to
                                             calculate the kinetic parameters of thermal decomposition.
                                                  The obtained DSC curves of NC/DEGDN with or without AN composites at various
                                             β are depicted in Figure 3c, while the onset and maximum peak temperatures (Tonset and
                                             Tpeak ), as well as the enthalpy of reaction (∆H) at β = 10 ◦ C/min, are listed in Table 1. Based
                                             on Figure 3c, the NC-DEGDN mixture displayed one exothermic process, comparable to
                                             what is mainly obtained for double-base propellants [17,37]. However, two exothermic
                                             events were detected for the AN/NC-DEGDN formulation, comprising the decomposition
                                             peaks of NC-DEGDN matrix and AN oxidizer [34,35]. Furthermore, the two first endother-
                                             mic processes, which were independent of the heating rate, corresponded, respectively, to
                                             two solid–solid transitions. The first one, which appeared at around 50 ◦ C, was attributed
                                             to orthorhombic–orthorhombic transition, where a modification of crystalline parameters
                                             occurred, while the second one, observed at around 123 ◦ C, was due to the tetragonal–cubic
                                             transition. These processes were then followed by a melting phenomenon of AN [12]. It is
                                             worth mentioning that the first peak encountered in the TGA curves of the investigated
                                             energetic composites, attributed to the evaporation process, did not appear in the DSC
                                             result, which was due to the lower mass employed in the DSC, and that the amount of
                                             absorbed energy during the endothermic evaporation process was beyond the lower limits
                                             of the DSC device.

                                             Table 1. Thermal characteristics of the investigated energetic composites obtained at a heating rate of
                                             β = 10 ◦ C/min.

                                             1st Decomposition Stage                                          2nd Decomposition Stage
       Sample
                           T onset   (◦ C)    T peak   (◦ C)   ∆T * (◦ C)    ∆H (J/g)       T onset   (◦ C)    T peak (◦ C)   ∆T * (◦ C)   ∆H (J/g)   ∆HT (J/g)
    NC-DEGDN                  182.5              200.4           17.9          1624.6             /                 /             /           /        1624.6
  AN/NC-DEGDN                 187.5              192.3            4.8          1961.8           204.4             212.4           8        935.04     2896.84
                                                                                                                                                      803–805
         AN                     /                  /               /             /              300.04            318.2          24          805
                                                                                                                                                        [35]
                                             * ∆T =Tpeak − Tonset ; ∆HT , total heat release.

                                                   Additionally, it is clear from Table 1 and Figure 3c that the addition of AN into
                                             NC-DEGDN significantly affected the thermolysis of the NC-DEGDN matrix, where its
                                             decomposition peak moved to lower temperature, taking advantage of the excellent interfa-
                                             cial contact between NC-DEGDN matrix and AN particles, as demonstrated by SEM. This
                                             behavior could be related to the nitrate ions in AN that improve the heat and mass transfer
                                             within the nitrate esters and accelerate their thermolysis, which could also be sustained
                                             by the difference between the peak and the onset temperatures (∆T) for AN/NC-DEGDN,
                                             which notably decreased with regard to those of the NC-DEGDN baseline (Table 1). In
                                             addition, it was found that the overall enthalpy of decomposition of AN/NC-DEGDN
                                             (2896.84 J/g) appeared to be higher than that of the NC-DEGDN matrix (1624.6 J/g). This
                                             finding seems to be promising for future propellant formulation and indicates the positive
                                             effects of AN on the increase in the energetic performance of the developed energetic
                                             formulation. Additionally, it is worth noting that the newly designed AN/NC-DEGDN
                                             propellant has better or comparable thermal stability than some reported NC-based en-
                                             ergetic formulations, including dihydroxylammonium 5,50 -bistetrazole-1,10 -diolate/NC-
                                             NG (Tpeak = 170.9 ◦ C, β = 10 ◦ C/min), hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine/NC-TEGDN
                                             (Tpeak = 194.9 ◦ C, β = 10 ◦ C/min) and NC/HMX (Tpeak = 168.2 ◦ C, β = 10 ◦ C/min) [38].

                                             3.5. Evaluation of Thermal Decomposition Kinetics
                                                  Owing to the risk of thermal runaway in NC-based composites, it is crucial to analyze
                                             their thermal behaviors. Therefore, the DSC data obtained at various heating rates (i.e., 5,
                                             10, 15 and 20 ◦ C/min) were used to determine the kinetic triplet, namely, the activation
                                             energy (Ea), the pre-exponential factor (Log(A)), and the most probable reaction model
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                                   9 of 14




                              (g(α)). Before examining the computed kinetic factors, it is interesting to define them.
                              Ea represents the lower energy needed to initiate a reaction, whereas the collision rate
                              between molecules per unit of time is determined by Log(A). Most of the time, Log(A) may
                              be computed using a model-free technique called compensating effect, which requires that
                              Ea and Log(A) have a linear relationship [18,39].
                                   As advised by the ICTAC, the asymmetric Frazer–Suzuki function, the most popular
                              technique for accurately fitting the multistep kinetic decomposition, was used for peak
                              deconvolution of the DSC thermogram of the AN/NC-DEGDN formulation. The obtained
                              data were then subjected to three model-free methods to determine the kinetic parameters
                              for each exothermic decomposition event. The mean values of Ea and Log(A) with their
                              corresponding errors for both energetic composites (NC/DEDGN and AN/NC-DEDGN),
                              as well as their most probable mechanisms g(α), are given in Table 2.

                              Table 2. Thermo-kinetic parameters of the elaborated energetic formulations.

       Samples              Isoconversional Methods              Eα (kJ/mol)        Log(A(s−1 ))                g(α)
                                      TAS                       118.9 ± 16.6         12.2 ± 2.1              P1/4 = a1/4
                                    it-KAS                      118.8 ± 16.5         12.2 ± 2.0              P1/4 = a1/4

  AN/NC-DEGDN                                β = 5 ◦ C/min                           12.3 ± 1.4                  /
     1st Pic                                 β = 10 ◦ C/min                          12.6 ± 1.4                  /
                           VYA/CE                               118.8 ± 16.4
                                             β = 15 ◦ C/min                          12.7 ± 1.4                  /
                                             β = 20 ◦ C/min                          13.8 ± 1.4                  /
                                      TAS                       119.2 ± 23.3         13.4 ± 2.8        A4 = [− ln (1 − α)]1/4
                                    it-KAS                      119.2 ± 23.3         13.2 ± 2.8              P1/2 = a1/2

  AN/NC-DEGDN                                β = 5 ◦ C/min                           13.3 ± 1.4                  /
     2nd pic                                 β = 10 ◦ C/min                          13.4 ± 1.4                  /
                           VYA/CE                               119.1 ± 20.9
                                             β = 15 ◦ C/min                          13.3 ± 1.4                  /
                                             β = 20 ◦ C/min                          13.3 ± 1.4                  /
                                      TAS                       134.5 ± 23.9         12.9 ± 3.2       A5/2 = [− ln (1 − α)]2/5
                                    it-KAS                      134.5 ± 23.9         12.7 ± 3.2       G7 = [1 − (1 − α)1/2 ]1/2
                                             β = 5 ◦ C/min                           13.3 ± 3.3                  /
     NC-DEGDN
                                             β = 10 ◦ C/min                          13.4 ± 3.3                  /
                           VYA/CE                               134.4 ± 23.9
                                             β = 15 ◦ C/min                          13.5 ± 3.3                  /
                                             β = 20 ◦ C/min                          13.6 ± 3.3                  /


                                    The main result was that the computed Ea and Log(A) using the three isoconversional
                              models for both propellants (NC/DEDGN and AN/NC-DEDGN) agreed well with each
                              other, highlighting the high consistency of the computed calculations. The accurateness of
                              the determined Arrhenius factors using the linear TAS and it-KAS approaches also could
                              be demonstrated by the high value of the linear correlation coefficients (R2 ) higher than
                              0.9993 [40–43].
                                    Figures 4–6 represent the evolution of activation energy and the pre-exponential factor,
                              with their associated confidence intervals, and the most probable reaction model g(α) as a
                              function of conversion (α) for the thermolysis process of NC/DEDGN, AN/NC-DEDGN
                              1st stage, and AN/NC-DEDGN 2st stage, respectively. In order to avoid the inherent errors
                              related to the initial and end periods, the conversion α range was fixed from 0.02 to 0.98.
                              The resulting findings show that the employed kinetic approaches provided close values
                              and similar trends of Arrhenius parameters for each investigated sample. Another finding
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                                          10 of 14



    Materials 2022, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                        11 of 15
                                   was that the evolution trends of Ea and Log(A) with conversion, for each decomposition
     Materials 2022, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                      event, were identical, which was explained by the energy compensation effects 11 of 15
                                                                                                                    [44].




                                     Figure 4. Variation of the kinetic parameters versus conversion for the thermal decomposition of
                                   Figure 4. 4.Variation
                                     Figure     Variationofofthe
                                                              the kinetic
                                                                  kinetic parameters  versusconversion
                                                                          parameters versus  conversionforfor
                                                                                                           thethe thermal
                                                                                                               thermal    decomposition
                                                                                                                       decomposition of of
                                     NC-DEGDN      composite.
                                     NC-DEGDNcomposite.
                                   NC-DEGDN        composite.




                                     Figure
                                     Figure 5. Variation of the kinetic
                                                                kinetic parameters
                                                                        parametersversus
                                                                                   versusconversion
                                                                                          conversionfor
                                                                                                     forthe
                                                                                                         thefirst
                                                                                                              firstthermal
                                                                                                                    thermaldecomposition
                                                                                                                            decomposition
                                   Figure 5. Variation of the kinetic parameters versus conversion for the first thermal decomposition
                                     event of
                                     event of AN/NC-DEGDN propellant.
                                                                 propellant.
                                   event of AN/NC-DEGDN propellant.
                           of AN that accelerated the thermolysis process and boosted both heat and mass transfers
                           within the nitrate esters. The same behavior was mentioned in the studies of Jain et al. and
                           Li et al., who reported an improvement in the thermolysis rate of nitrate esters when AP
                           was introduced [45,46]. Moreover, the average value of Ea (≈ 119 kJ/mol) for the second
                           decomposition event, which corresponded to the decomposition of AN in NC/DEGDN
Materials 2022, 15, 8138
                           matrix, was found to be lower than that of pure AN reported in previous work (Ea11≈of146   14

                           kJ/mol) [44,47].




                           Figure 6. Variation
                           Figure 6. Variationof
                                               ofthe
                                                  thekinetic
                                                      kineticparameters
                                                              parametersversus
                                                                         versusconversion forfor
                                                                                 conversion   thethe
                                                                                                  second thermal
                                                                                                     second      decomposition
                                                                                                            thermal decomposi-
                           event of AN/NC-DEGDN
                           tion event of AN/NC-DEGDN   propellant.
                                                           propellant.

                                It can important
                                 Other  be clearly parameters
                                                    seen in Figure     4 and Table
                                                                  to determine       2 that
                                                                                in the kinetictheanalysis
                                                                                                  decomposition    of double-
                                                                                                          of the prepared   en-
                           base  NC/DEDGN       propellant    was  controlled by  a one-step    process described
                           ergetic formulations were their most probable mechanisms (g(α)) derived from the used   by  a stable
                           evolution   of Arrhenius
                           kinetic approaches.   The parameters
                                                       mathematical  [42]. Furthermore,
                                                                        formula  of g(α) isitsummarized
                                                                                              is worth noting   that 2,
                                                                                                           in Table       Ea its
                                                                                                                     theand  of
                           NC-DEGDN       predicted   in this study  (134.5 ± 24  kJ/mol)   agreed   well with that found
                           evolution vs. 𝛼 is illustrated in Figures 4–6. It is interesting to note that the Vyazovkin      for
                           other double-base
                           approach            propellants
                                       did not provide        [9]. The incorporation
                                                          a mathematical    formula ofofg(α),
                                                                                         AN intobut the  NC-DEGDNwith
                                                                                                    its combination   film led
                                                                                                                            the
                           to a decrease in Ea values by about 12% (Figure 5), which was attributed to the catalytic
                           compensation effect could offer numerical values of the model. According to the obtained
                           effect of AN that accelerated the thermolysis process and boosted both heat and mass
                           results, we could conclude that the studied samples decomposed following different
                           transfers within the nitrate esters. The same behavior was mentioned in the studies of
                           mechanisms. Referring to the TAS method, the NC-DEGDN composite decomposed fol-
                           Jain et al. and Li et al., who reported an improvement in the thermolysis rate of nitrate
                           lowing the random nucleation process of Avrami–Erofeev. However, the addition of AN
                           esters when AP was introduced [45,46]. Moreover, the average value of Ea (≈ 119 kJ/mol)
                           to the NC-DEGDN, which caused a drop in Ea, changed the decomposition behavior of
                           for the second decomposition event, which corresponded to the decomposition of AN in
                           the nitrate esters in NC/DEGDN from A5/2 to P1/4, which conformed to the nucleation pro-
                           NC/DEGDN matrix, was found to be lower than that of pure AN reported in previous
                           cess (power law) for both the TAS and it-KAS methods. However, the second stage of
                           work (Ea ≈ 146 kJ/mol) [44,47].
                                Other important parameters to determine in the kinetic analysis of the prepared
                           energetic formulations were their most probable mechanisms (g(α)) derived from the used
                           kinetic approaches. The mathematical formula of g(α) is summarized in Table 2, and its
                           evolution vs. α is illustrated in Figures 4–6. It is interesting to note that the Vyazovkin
                           approach did not provide a mathematical formula of g(α), but its combination with the
                           compensation effect could offer numerical values of the model. According to the obtained
                           results, we could conclude that the studied samples decomposed following different
                           mechanisms. Referring to the TAS method, the NC-DEGDN composite decomposed
                           following the random nucleation process of Avrami–Erofeev. However, the addition of AN
                           to the NC-DEGDN, which caused a drop in Ea , changed the decomposition behavior of
                           the nitrate esters in NC/DEGDN from A5/2 to P1/4 , which conformed to the nucleation
                           process (power law) for both the TAS and it-KAS methods. However, the second stage of
                           decomposition, which corresponded to the exothermic decomposition of AN, followed an
                           Avrami–Erofeev mechanism (A4 ) [34]. On the other hand, the same model was provided by
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                                          12 of 14




                                  it-KAS for the 1st and 2nd stages of AN/NC-DEGDN, whereas NC-DEGDN decomposed
                                  following the G7 model. Overall, the findings of this study give new insights into the
                                  importance of developing energetic double-base composites based on DEGDN and AN
                                  rather than the use of highly sensitive NG [48,49].

                                  4. Conclusions and Future Work
                                        A new, modified double-base solid propellant (AN/NC-DEGDN) was successfully
                                  prepared through AN dispersion in a mixture of NC and DEGDN. The optimal formula-
                                  tion, which corresponded to AN/NC-DEGDN (60/10/30 wt.%), was obtained based on
                                  maximizing the critical parameter, the specific impulse, using the CEA-NASA program.
                                  Morphology characterization and density assessments of the prepared energetic compos-
                                  ites indicated an appropriate homogeneity of AN in the NC-DEGDN formulation with
                                  good dispersion. The AN/NC-DEGDN composite showed lower thermal and kinetic
                                  characteristics than the NC-DEGDN composite, while a higher enthalpy of decomposition
                                  was obtained, demonstrating the positive catalytic influence of the incorporation of AN.
                                  Furthermore, the thermolysis of AN was also increased by the released hot reactive species,
                                  which was expected to enhance the burning rate of the propellant. In addition, the em-
                                  ployed isoconversional kinetic models revealed that the developed energetic formulations
                                  decomposed following different mechanisms, which could change from a random nucle-
                                  ation mechanism of Avrami–Erofeev to power law nucleation. Overall, it can be concluded
                                  that the developed AN/NC-DEGDN formulation, which has inherent thermal and kinetic
                                  characteristics as well as high energetic performance with respect to the NC-DEGDN
                                  baseline, can be seen as a promising candidate for advanced high-performance modified
                                  double-base propellants in the future.

                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.B., A.F.T. and D.T.; Methodology, H.B.; Resources, H.B.;
                                  Investigation, H.B.; data treatment, H.B.; Writing—Original Draft, H.B.; Supervision, A.F.T. and D.T.;
                                  Review & Editing, A.F.T., D.T., A.A., R.A.H., A.B., C.B., S.H., M.D. and T.M.K. All authors have read
                                  and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Benhammada, A.; Trache, D. Thermal decomposition of energetic materials using TG-FTIR and TG-MS: A state-of-the-art review.
      Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 2020, 55, 724–777. [CrossRef]
2.    Klapötke, T.M. Chemistry of high-energy materials. In Chemistry of High-Energy Materials; de Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 2019.
3.    Elbasuney, S.; Fahd, A.; Mostafa, H.E. Combustion characteristics of extruded double base propellant based on ammonium
      perchlorate/aluminum binary mixture. Fuel 2017, 208, 296–304. [CrossRef]
4.    Elghafour, A.M.; Radwan, M.A.; Mostafa, H.E.; Fahd, A.; Elbasuney, S. Highly energetic nitramines: A novel platonizing agent
      for double-base propellants with superior combustion characteristics. Fuel 2018, 227, 478–484. [CrossRef]
5.    Damse, R.; Singh, A. Studies on the high-energy gun propellant formulations based on 1, 5-diazido-3-nitrazapentane. J. Hazard.
      Mater. 2009, 172, 1699–1702. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Li, Y.; Chen, P.; Liu, Y.; Yin, P.; He, C.; Pang, S. Synthesis and Characterization of Fluorodinitrobenzenes with Tunable Melting
      Point: Potential Low Sensitive Energetic Plasticizer and Melt-Cast Carrier. Chin. J. Chem. 2020, 38, 1619–1624. [CrossRef]
7.    Reese, D.A.; Groven, L.J.; Son, S.F. Formulation and Characterization of a New Nitroglycerin-Free Double Base Propellant.
      Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 2014, 39, 205–210. [CrossRef]
8.    Buszek, R.J.; Soto, D.; Dailey, J.M.; Bolden, S.; Tall, T.L.; Hudgens, L.M.; Marshall, C.A.; Boatz, J.A.; Drake, G.W. Structures and
      binding energies of nitrate plasticizers DEGDN, TEGDN, and nitroglycerine. Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 2018, 43, 115–121.
      [CrossRef]
9.    Yahya, P.K.I.; Moniruzzaman, M.; Gill, P.P. Interaction and thermal studies on graphene oxide in NC/DEGDN/GO nanocompos-
      ites. RSC Adv. 2019, 9, 35158–35164. [CrossRef]
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                                            13 of 14




10.   Agrawal, J.P. High Energy Materials: Propellants, Explosives and Pyrotechnics; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2010.
11.   Badgujar, D.; Talawar, M.; Zarko, V.; Mahulikar, P. New directions in the area of modern energetic polymers: An overview.
      Combust. Explos. Shock. Waves 2017, 53, 371–387. [CrossRef]
12.   Trache, D.; Klapötke, T.M.; Maiz, L.; Abd-Elghany, M.; DeLuca, L.T. Recent advances in new oxidizers for solid rocket propulsion.
      Green Chem. 2017, 19, 4711–4736. [CrossRef]
13.   Singh, G. Recent Advances on Energetic Materials; Nova Science Publishers: Hauppauge, NY, USA, 2015; pp. 1–411.
14.   Oommen, C.; Jain, S. Ammonium nitrate: A promising rocket propellant oxidizer. J. Hazard. Mater. 1999, 67, 253–281. [CrossRef]
15.   Chaturvedi, S.; Dave, P.N. A review on the use of nanometals as catalysts for the thermal decomposition of ammonium perchlorate.
      J. Saudi Chem. Soc. 2013, 17, 135–149. [CrossRef]
16.   Touidjine, S.; Boulkadid, K.M.; Trache, D.; Belkhiri, S.; Mezroua, A. Preparation and Characterization of Polyurethane/Nitrocellulose
      Blends as Binder for Composite Solid Propellants. Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 2022, 47, e202000340. [CrossRef]
17.   Tarchoun, A.F.; Trache, D.; Abdelaziz, A.; Bekhouche, S.; Boukeciat, H. Exploration of palm fronds as a prominent alternative
      resource for the production of energetic cellulose-rich biopolymers. Mater. Today Proc. 2022, 53, 31–35. [CrossRef]
18.   Tarchoun, A.F.; Trache, D.; Klapötke, T.M.; Slimani, K.; Belouettar, B.-E.; Abdelaziz, A.; Bekhouche, S.; Bessa, W. Valorization of es-
      parto grass cellulosic derivatives for the development of promising energetic azidodeoxy biopolymers: Synthesis, characterization
      and isoconversional thermal kinetic analysis. Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 2022, 47, e202100293. [CrossRef]
19.   Chalghoum, F.; Trache, D.; Maggi, F.; Benziane, M. Effect of Complex Metal Hydrides on the Elimination of Hydrochloric Acid
      Exhaust Products from High-Performance Composite Solid Propellants: A Theoretical Analysis. Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 2020,
      45, 1204–1215. [CrossRef]
20.   Bondarchuk, S.V. Magic of Numbers: A Guide for Preliminary Estimation of the Detonation Performance of C–H–N–O Explosives
      Based on Empirical Formulas. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2021, 60, 1952–1961. [CrossRef]
21.   Trache, D.; Abdelaziz, A.; Siouani, B. A simple and linear isoconversional method to determine the pre-exponential factors and
      the mathematical reaction mechanism functions. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2017, 128, 335–348. [CrossRef]
22.   Trache, D.; Maggi, F.; Palmucci, I.; DeLuca, L.T. Thermal behavior and decomposition kinetics of composite solid propellants in
      the presence of amide burning rate suppressants. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2018, 132, 1601–1615. [CrossRef]
23.   Sbirrazzuoli, N. Determination of pre-exponential factor and reaction mechanism in a model-free way. Thermochim. Acta 2020,
      691, 178707. [CrossRef]
24.   Law, C.K.; Makino, A.; Lu, T.F. On the off-stoichiometric peaking of adiabatic flame temperature. Combustion 2006, 145, 808–819.
      [CrossRef]
25.   Chaturvedi, S.; Dave, P.N. Solid propellants: AP/HTPB composite propellants. Arab. J. Chem. 2019, 12, 2061–2068. [CrossRef]
26.   Wang, H.; Kline, D.J.; Rehwoldt, M.; Wu, T.; Zhao, W.; Wang, X.; Zachariah, M.R. Architecture can significantly alter the energy
      release rate from nanocomposite energetics. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2019, 1, 982–989. [CrossRef]
27.   Huang, X.; Luo, Q.; Zhu, J.; Li, Z.; Li, C.; Pei, C. The preparation and rheological properties of novel energetic composites
      TEGDN/NBC. Propellants Explos. Pyrotech. 2020, 45, 101–110. [CrossRef]
28.   Wei, W.; Jiang, X.; Lu, L.; Yang, X.; Wang, X. Study on the catalytic effect of NiO nanoparticles on the thermal decomposition of
      TEGDN/NC propellant. J. Hazard. Mater. 2009, 168, 838–842. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.   Hu, J.; Liu, Y.; Cong, K.; He, J.; Yang, R. Curing behaviors of alkynyl-terminated copolyether with glycidyl azide polymer in
      energetic plasticizers. Polymers 2020, 12, 1199. [CrossRef]
30.   Trache, D.; Khimeche, K. Study on the influence of ageing on thermal decomposition of double-base propellants and prediction
      of their in-use time. Fire Mater. 2013, 37, 328–336. [CrossRef]
31.   Zhao, W.; Ren, H.; Ou, Y.; Jiao, Q. Nanocomposites with Al and Ti binary fuels and potassium oxysalts for energetic applications.
      Mater. Lett. 2020, 262, 127189. [CrossRef]
32.   Wang, Y.; Jiang, L.; Dong, J.; Li, B.; Shen, J.; Chen, L.; Fu, Y.; He, W. Three-dimensional network structure nitramine gun propellant
      with nitrated bacterial cellulose. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 2020, 9, 15094–15101. [CrossRef]
33.   Wei, R.; Huang, S.; Huang, Q.; Ouyang, D.; Chen, Q.; Yuen, R.; Wang, J. Experimental study on the fire characteristics of typical
      nitrocellulose mixtures using a cone calorimeter. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2018, 134, 1471–1480. [CrossRef]
34.   Gunawan, R.; Zhang, D. Thermal stability and kinetics of decomposition of ammonium nitrate in the presence of pyrite. J. Hazard.
      Mater. 2009, 165, 751–758. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.   Vargeese, A.A.; Muralidharan, K. Anatase–brookite mixed phase nano TiO2 catalyzed homolytic decomposition of ammonium
      nitrate. J. Hazard. Mater. 2011, 192, 1314–1320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Abd-Elghany, M.; Klapötke, T.M.; Elbeih, A. Investigation of 2, 2, 2-trinitroethyl-nitrocarbamate as a high energy dense oxidizer
      and its mixture with Nitrocellulose (thermal behavior and decomposition kinetics). J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 2017, 128, 397–404.
      [CrossRef]
37.   Tarchoun, A.F.; Sayah, Z.B.D.; Trache, D.; Klapötke, T.M.; Belmerabt, M.; Abdelaziz, A.; Bekhouche, S. Towards investigating the
      characteristics and thermal kinetic behavior of emergent nanostructured nitrocellulose prepared using various sulfonitric media.
      J. Nanostructure Chem. 2022, 12, 1–15. [CrossRef]
38.   Wang, Y.; Song, X.; Song, D.; Liang, L.; An, C.; Wang, J. Synthesis, thermolysis, and sensitivities of HMX/NC energetic
      nanocomposites. J. Hazard. Mater. 2016, 312, 73–83. [CrossRef]
Materials 2022, 15, 8138                                                                                                      14 of 14




39.   Hanafi, S.; Trache, D.; Meziani, R.; Boukciat, H.; Mezroua, A.; Tarchoun, A.F.; Derradji, M. Synthesis, characterization and
      thermal decomposition behavior of a novel HNTO/AN co-crystal as a promising rocket propellant oxidizer. Chem. Eng. J. 2021,
      417, 128010. [CrossRef]
40.   Vyazovkin, S. How much is the accuracy of activation energy affected by ignoring thermal inertia? Int. J. Chem. Kinet. 2020,
      52, 23–28. [CrossRef]
41.   Burnham, A.K.; Stanford, V.L.; Vyazovkin, S.; Kahl, E.M. Effect of pressure on TATB and LX-17 thermal decomposition. Thermochim.
      Acta 2021, 699, 178908. [CrossRef]
42.   Vyazovkin, S. Isoconversional Kinetics of Thermally Stimulated Processes; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015.
43.   Sbirrazzuoli, N. Determination of pre-exponential factors and of the mathematical functions f (α) or G (α) that describe the
      reaction mechanism in a model-free way. Thermochim. Acta 2013, 564, 59–69. [CrossRef]
44.   Vara, J.A.; Dave, P.N. Metal oxide nanoparticles as catalyst for thermal behavior of AN based composite solid propellant. Chem.
      Phys. Lett. 2019, 730, 600–607. [CrossRef]
45.   Li, X.; Liu, X.; Cheng, Y.; Li, Y.; Mei, X. Thermal decomposition properties of double-base propellant and ammonium perchlorate.
      J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2014, 115, 887–894. [CrossRef]
46.   Jain, S.; Chakraborty, S.; Qiao, L. Burn rate enhancement of ammonium perchlorate–nitrocellulose composite solid propellant
      using copper oxide–graphene foam micro-structures. Combust. Flame 2019, 206, 282–291. [CrossRef]
47.   Babrauskas, V.; Leggett, D. Thermal decomposition of ammonium nitrate. Fire Mater. 2020, 44, 250–268. [CrossRef]
48.   Liu, Z. Review and prospect of thermal analysis technology applied to study thermal properties of energetic materials.
      FirePhysChem 2021, 1, 129–138. [CrossRef]
49.   El-Sayed, S.A.; Pyrolysis, A. Review of thermal decomposition, kinetics parameters and evolved gases during pyrolysis of
      energetic materials using different techniques. J. Anal. 2022, 161, 105364. [CrossRef]
