              molecules
Perspective
Ionic Liquids Based on the Concept of Melting Point Lowering
Due to Ethoxylation
Manuel Rothe             , Eva Müller, Patrick Denk and Werner Kunz *

                                          Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Regensburg,
                                          D-93040 Regensburg, Germany; Manuel.Rothe@ur.de (M.R.); Eva.Mueller@ur.de (E.M.);
                                          Patrick.Denk@ur.de (P.D.)
                                          * Correspondence: Werner.Kunz@ur.de


                                          Abstract: Most of the commonly used Ionic Liquids (ILs) contain bulky organic cations with suitable
                                          anions. With our COMPLET (Concept of Melting Point Lowering due to Ethoxylation), we follow a
                                          different approach. We use simple, low-toxic, cheap, and commercially available anions of the type
                                          Cx (EO)y CH2 COO– to liquefy presumably any simple metal ion, independently of its charge. In the
                                          simplest case, the cation can be sodium or lithium, but synthesis of Ionic Liquids is also possible
                                          with cations of higher valences such as transition or rare earth metals. Anions with longer alkyl
                                          chains are surface active and form surface active ionic liquids (SAILs), which combine properties
                                          of ionic and nonionic surfactants at room temperature. They show significant structuring even
                                          in their pure state, i.e., in the absence of water or any other added solvent. This approach offers
                                          new application domains that go far beyond the common real or hypothetical use of classical Ionic
                                          Liquids. Possible applications include the separation of rare earth metals, the use as interesting media
                                          for metal catalysis, or the synthesis of completely new materials (for example, in analogy to metal
                                organic frameworks).
         

Citation: Rothe, M.; Müller, E.; Denk,    Keywords: ionic liquids; surface active ionic liquids (SAILs); room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs);
P.; Kunz, W. Ionic Liquids Based on       alkyl ethylene glycol ether carboxylates; rare earth metals; transition metals; colloids; green chemistry
the Concept of Melting Point
Lowering Due to Ethoxylation.
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034. https://
doi.org/10.3390/molecules26134034
                                          1. Introduction
Academic Editor: João Paulo Leal               Some years ago, one of the authors of the present paper coauthored a publication
                                          entitled The hype with Ionic Liquids as solvents [1]. Indeed, sometimes it seems that this
Received: 22 May 2021                     topic is (ab-)used as a machinery to increase the number of publications and the re-
Accepted: 29 June 2021                    searchers’ impact factors rather than providing useful information about basic concepts or
Published: 1 July 2021                    potential applications.
                                               Today, the majority of colleagues agree that Ionic Liquids are not necessarily “green”.
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral      Their synthesis usually is “red” and involves many steps and their lacking vapor pressure is
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   not always a favourable property, because they cannot be separated by distillation. Further,
published maps and institutional affil-   they are often quite toxic, badly biodegradable, etc.
iations.                                       However, they also undoubtedly have advantages. They enormously widen the
                                          spectrum of available liquids at room temperature. Although there is a general tendency to
                                          increasingly limit the number of industrially used solvents and liquids, ILs may provide
                                          alternatives to currently applied and well-known ones. In this sense, their role as “designer
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.         solvents” may be justified, provided that it is rigorously checked that existing classical
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        solvents, which are usually cheaper, cannot fulfil equally well the intended purpose.
This article is an open access article         So why do we need ILs?
distributed under the terms and                First of all, and almost trivial: they provide the opportunity to dissolve certain so-
conditions of the Creative Commons        lutes better than conventional solvents, often by means of special solute–solvent inter-
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     actions. Thus, a) the liquid state matters and b) the solubility performance is important.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          Compared to these features, the fact that the liquid consists of ions and therefore electro-
4.0/).




Molecules 2021, 26, 4034. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26134034                                         https://www.mdpi.com/journal/molecules
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                             2 of 10




                           static interactions may play a prominent role, is (often) of minor importance, except, e.g.,
                           in electrochemistry.
                                 Second, and sometimes important and useful: the liquid may be structured in a way
                           that goes beyond structuring in conventional low-molecular weight liquids. For example,
                           there are surface-active, amphiphilic ILs (SAILs), where the imidazolium ring is connected
                           to one or two long alkyl-chains thus creating cationic surfactants with convenient, usually
                           small negatively charged counterions, mostly halides. Whereas these molecules may
                           have some relevance when diluted in water (where they have some interesting properties,
                           because of the smearing of the positive charges throughout the imidazolium ring), see [2]
                           and references there, the current application in its pure IL state is rather limited.
                                 In light of the demands and the quest for new room-temperature liquids and solvents,
                           it seems evident to look for alternative approaches to ILs that avoid the inherent shortcom-
                           ings, such as laborious synthesis and purification and the limitation that always more or
                           less complex organic cations are required. These facts motivated us to follow a different
                           strategy: instead of lowering the melting points of salts via the bulkiness of the cations with,
                           as a consequence, an increase of the solid-state Gibbs energy due to hindered packing, we
                           lower the Gibbs energy of the liquid state by increasing the entropy of the anions [3]. It is, in
                           fact, an already established concept and partly explains the relative success of the so-called
                           Akypo™ surfactants, commercialized by the Japanese company Kao Chemicals. Note that
                           the concept can also be applied to cations, but this is not part of the present paper [4].
                                 The general chemical structure of the molecules is M+ Cx EOy CH2 COO– , which we
                           call alkyl ethylene glycol ether carboxylates in what follows. Usually, these substances are
                           commercialized as neutral acids, i.e., M+ = H+ . Most interestingly, M+ can be any type
                           of cation, even as simple as Na+ , Li+ , K+ , NH4 + , etc., but it can be also a complex cation
                           and even a cationic surfactant. In the latter case, one can generate “true” cat-anionics, i.e.,
                           a mixture of cationic and anionic surfactants without any further counterions and this
                           combination being even liquid at room temperature.
                                 Let us have a closer look at the anion. Evidently, if x ≥ 8, the anion is a surfactant,
                           independently of y, but there are also very short anions available with x = 1–6 only. Then,
                           the resulting ILs behave as hydrotropes or as “simple” more or less unstructured solvents
                           (at least one would not expect any mesoscopic structuring). To have them be liquid at
                           room temperature, a sufficient number of ethylene glycol groups (EO) is mandatory. These
                           groups are not only significantly hydrated in water thus ensuring high water solubility,
                           but they also exhibit a high conformational entropy even in the pure state. This is the secret
                           behind their low melting points: they lose this entropy upon freezing, which is (Gibbs)
                           energetically unfavorable. We called this approach to ILs Concept of Melting Point Lowering
                           due to Ethoxylation (COMPLET) [3,5].
                                 Compared to the “classical” concept to conceive ILs, several advantages are evident:
                           (i)   The ingredients are readily available. Akypos are quite cheap and sold in tons. A
                                 simple mixing with alkali hydroxides and subsequent (freeze) drying is sufficient. No
                                 laborious synthesis and purification are necessary.
                           (ii) ILs can be made with simple cations and, as we demonstrate in what follows, even
                                 with di- and trivalent cations.
                           (iii) The ILs are of low toxicity and readily biodegradable so that they can be even used in
                                 cosmetics, of course, only with a convenient cation.
                           (iv) The anion in the IL can be surface active (and thus structuring) and can be liquid even
                                 with a surface-active cation forming “true cat-anionics” without further counterions.
                           (v) Some of them are even of very low viscosity at room temperature.
                                In the following sections, we discuss three different cases. In the first case, we consider
                           ILs with metal cations of different valency, in the second case, surface active ILs based on
                           the COMPLET concept, and finally, a particular case, where a partly protonated IL consists
                           of direct micelles even in its pure state.
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                              3 of 10




                           2. Ionic Liquids with Metal Ions of Different Valency
                                 Ionic Liquids are often praised for their flexibility and customizability, to the point of
                           being called “designer solvents”. In reality, however, this is only true to a degree. While a
                           variety of properties can be achieved with conventional ILs, their makeup, and especially
                           the strategy behind them, is often quite limited. Only a few choice cations act as the “heart”
                           of nearly every “modern” Ionic Liquid, modified to suit the desired application. Besides
                           some phosphonium- and ammonium-based ILs, the majority possesses an imidazolium
                           cation as their “builder ion”. These ions can be modified and customized to a high degree
                           and reliably lead to compounds with sufficiently low melting points to be classified as
                           ionic liquids.
                                 If one desires to incorporate metal ions as part of their ionic liquids, however, a
                           problem arises: metal ions also carry positive charges and are thus inherently incompatible
                           with all conventional “builder ions”. Naturally, there are established ways to circumvent
                           this issue. The metal cations can be incorporated into larger complexes with a single
                           negative excess charge, which is then compensated by one of the conventional “builder
                           ions”. This strategy is often employed in the context of transition metals, which usually
                           prefer higher oxidation states. A second common solution to the incompatibility issue
                           is to skip the additional complexation compounds, and instead to attach residues to the
                           “builder ion” that can bind to the metal ions [6–8].
                                 Some arguments can be made against these two strategies. The transformation into a
                           negatively charged complex adds additional compounds into the mix. They can alter the
                           properties of the metal, for example, in catalytic applications, or introduce unwanted ions
                           into the IL. Complexation by a sidechain of the main “builder ion” may allow the direct
                           incorporation of bare metal ions, avoiding this issue. As the IL exists independently of the
                           metal ion, however, one can also argue that instead of forming an ionic liquid with that
                           metal ion, an IL is made that can only solubilize it instead.
                                 Ideally, one would combine an anionic builder ion directly with the bare metal cation.
                           Although avoiding the aforementioned issues, another is introduced: many metal ions
                           carry more than a single charge. The reason why this is an issue lies once again in the
                           conventional concept for ionic liquids: they usually share a 1:1 stoichiometry. While ionic
                           liquids with higher charges do exist, they are usually achieved by the simple linkage of
                           several “builder ions” [7,8].
                                 With our alkyl ethylene glycol ether carboxylate salts, all these issues can be avoided.
                           As they are built on a different concept, relying on entropy differences of the liquid and
                           solid phases instead of enthalpy differences, they are much more flexible, especially when
                           it comes to the combination with different cations. With C8 EO5 CH2 COO– ([C8E5c]), we
                           put an anion at the center of the ionic liquid, and can easily combine it with a variety of
                           metal ions. The COMPLET also allows for a deviation of the classical 1:1 stoichiometry,
                           and di- and trivalent transition and rare earth metals ([REM]) can be easily incorporated
                           (M = Fe2+ , Fe3+ , Cu2+ , Co2+ , Ni2+ , Mn2+ , Y3+ , La3+ , Dy3+ , Eu3+ , Gd3+ ). The synthesis of
                           these ionic liquids is as simple as it can be: the free acid [H][C8E5c] is mixed with a
                           basic metal salt, usually a hydroxide or carbonate, and stirred for several hours under
                           gentle heating. Figure 1 shows a selection of typical divalent Ionic Liquids based on the
                           COMPLET (M2+ = Cu2+ , Co2+ , Ni2+ , Mn2+ ).
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                                                                4 of 10
 Molecules 2021, 26, x                                                                                                                                   4 of 10




                            Figure1.1.Typical
                           Figure      TypicalCOMPLET-based
                                               COMPLET-basedionic
                                                             ionicliquids
                                                                    liquidscontaining
                                                                            containingdivalent
                                                                                       divalenttransition
                                                                                                 transitionmetal
                                                                                                            metalions.
                                                                                                                   ions.

                                   Theresulting
                                  The    resultingILs    ILsshow
                                                              showveryvery    diverse
                                                                           diverse        properties
                                                                                       properties      and and    ion-specific
                                                                                                              ion-specific           effects.
                                                                                                                               effects.     As As    an exam-
                                                                                                                                                 an example,
                            ple,dynamic
                           the    the dynamic viscosities     at 15 ◦atC15
                                                      viscosities             °C range
                                                                          range    from low,frominlow,the in   theofcase
                                                                                                            case             of [Cu][C8E5c]
                                                                                                                        [Cu][C8E5c]       2 (849     (849
                                                                                                                                                   mPa
                                                                                                                                                   2       s),mPa
                                                                                                                                                               to
                            s), to in
                           high,    high,   in theof
                                       the cases       cases   of [Eu][C8E5c]
                                                          [Eu][C8E5c]      3  (126.6 3 (126.6
                                                                                        Pa  s)   Pa
                                                                                                or   s)   or [La][C8E5c]
                                                                                                    [La][C8E5c]        3 (152.2 3 (152.2
                                                                                                                                   Pa   s), Pa
                                                                                                                                            and  s), and
                                                                                                                                                   very      very
                                                                                                                                                          high,
                           in  the case
                            high,   in theofcase[Mn][C8E5c]        2 (429.3
                                                      of [Mn][C8E5c]           Pa s) [9].
                                                                            2 (429.3    Pa s)The[9].viscosity
                                                                                                     The viscosity  of a liquid      is a measure
                                                                                                                           of a liquid      is a measure of theof
                           mobility
                            the mobilityof itsofmolecules,
                                                    its molecules,and as and such    it canitprovide
                                                                                as such          can providesome some basic information
                                                                                                                              basic information   about about
                                                                                                                                                           how
                           the
                            how ILsthemayILsbemay structured.      If the viscosity
                                                        be structured.                    is high,isthe
                                                                             If the viscosity               molecules
                                                                                                         high,               within the
                                                                                                                  the molecules               liquid
                                                                                                                                          within    thecannot
                                                                                                                                                          liquid
                           freely
                            cannot  flow   pastflow
                                       freely      one past
                                                          another,
                                                                 oneand     it is reasonable
                                                                      another,                     to assume that
                                                                                    and it is reasonable                  multiple
                                                                                                                     to assume           metal
                                                                                                                                      that        centersmetal
                                                                                                                                            multiple          are
                           crosslinked
                            centers are via       the alkylvia
                                            crosslinked         ethylene
                                                                    the alkylglycol     ether glycol
                                                                                  ethylene      carboxylates.
                                                                                                          ether carboxylates.
                                  To
                                   Tobetter
                                        better understand the       the mobility
                                                                         mobilitywithin withinthe  the    liquid,
                                                                                                      liquid,         specifically
                                                                                                                  specifically      thetheion ion    mobility,
                                                                                                                                                mobility,     vis-
                           viscosity    measurements            can  be  supplemented           with    the  measurement
                            cosity measurements can be supplemented with the measurement of electrical conductiv-                   of  electrical    conduc-
                           tivities.
                            ities. TheThe      combination
                                          combination              of these
                                                              of these    twotwo       mobilities,
                                                                                 mobilities,      so the so general
                                                                                                             the general        molecular
                                                                                                                          molecular              mobility
                                                                                                                                          mobility     is givenis
                           given
                            by thebyviscosity
                                        the viscosityand theandionthemobility
                                                                       ion mobility        is given
                                                                                    is given           by the
                                                                                                  by the          electrical
                                                                                                            electrical          conductivity,
                                                                                                                           conductivity,             provides
                                                                                                                                                 provides      in-
                           information
                            formation about  aboutthe  theassociation
                                                            associationof   of the
                                                                                the ions
                                                                                      ions inin the
                                                                                                the IL.
                                                                                                     IL. InIn an
                                                                                                               an ideal
                                                                                                                    ideal case
                                                                                                                            case with
                                                                                                                                    withfull
                                                                                                                                           fulldissociation
                                                                                                                                                 dissociation
                           of
                            of the anion(s) and the cation, the system behaves like a strong electrolyte.In
                               the   anion(s)     and     the  cation,   the   system      behaves       like  a   strong    electrolyte.         Inaadouble
                                                                                                                                                        double
                           logarithmic      plot    of  the  molar    conductivity         Λ  against     the   fluidity    η −1 , also called a Walden
                            logarithmic plot of the molar conductivity Λ against the fluidity η , also called a Walden           −1
                           Plot,
                            Plot,this
                                   thisbehavior
                                         behaviorisisrepresented
                                                            representedby      byaalinelineofofunit
                                                                                                  unitslope.
                                                                                                         slope.Such SuchILs ILsarearealsoalsooften
                                                                                                                                                oftentermed
                                                                                                                                                        termed
                           “good”
                            “good” ionic liquids. In contrast, “poor” ionic liquids show large negative deviationsfrom
                                      ionic   liquids.     In contrast,    “poor”      ionic   liquids     show     large   negative       deviations       from
                           this
                            this ideal line (often also “KCl line”) as a result of ion pairing [10,11]. It is importanttoto
                                 ideal   line    (often    also   “KCl   line”)    as   a result    of  ion   pairing      [10,11].     It is  important
                           keep
                            keep in in mind
                                        mind thatthat this     classification into
                                                        this classification        into “good”
                                                                                          “good”or     or“poor”
                                                                                                            “poor”does   doesnotnotimply
                                                                                                                                       implythe  thequality
                                                                                                                                                       quality  of
                           of  the   substance,       but   rather   is a   measure       of  its  ionicity—a
                            the substance, but rather is a measure of its ionicity—a spectrum from fully ionic to mo- spectrum        from    fully   ionic    to
                           molecular      liquids.
                            lecular liquids.
                                  For three of these ionic liquids, a Walden Plot such as this has been previously created
                                   For three of these ionic liquids, a Walden Plot such as this has been previously created
                           and can be seen in Figure 2 [9]. The ILs chosen are all based on rare earth metals, which are
                            and can be seen in Figure 2 [9]. The ILs chosen are all based on rare earth metals, which
                           generally known to have quite similar properties. These similarities do not hold true in
                            are generally known to have quite similar properties. These similarities do not hold true
                           the case of our ILs. Not only do they possess vastly different fluidities, but also vary quite
                            in the case of our ILs. Not only do they possess vastly different fluidities, but also vary
                           strongly in their measures of ion association. Both [Eu][C8E5c]3 and [Y][C8E5c]3 show
                            quite strongly in their measures of ion association. Both [Eu][C8E5c]3 and [Y][C8E5c]3
                           significant negative deviations from the ideal line, indicating quite strong association of
                            show significant negative deviations from the ideal line, indicating quite strong associa-
                           the ions. [La][C8E5c]3 , however, remarkably displays only small deviations, and conse-
                            tion of the ions. [La][C8E5c]3, however, remarkably displays only small deviations, and
                           quently, strong dissociation of the ions. This difference in ion mobilities and association
                            consequently, strong dissociation of the ions. This difference in ion mobilities and associ-
                           presumptively is rooted in structural differences within the IL. It is known that related
                            ation presumptively is rooted in structural differences within the IL. It is known that re-
                           ionic liquids with alkali metals form both interconnected networks and globular complexes
                            lated ionic liquids with alkali metals form both interconnected networks and globular
                           for sodium and potassium, respectively [12]. This difference in structure is also reflected
                            complexes
                           in               for sodium
                               the difference                 and potassium,
                                                     in melting      points—therespectively
                                                                                        sodium salt[12].   meltsThis atdifference
                                                                                                                         −57 ◦ C and    in structure
                                                                                                                                            the potassium is also
                            reflected
                           salt  at +60in ◦ Cthe   difference
                                               [13].    Transition in metals,
                                                                       meltingand  points—the
                                                                                         especiallysodium
                                                                                                        rare earth  saltmetals,
                                                                                                                          melts athave −57 quite
                                                                                                                                             °C and     the po-
                                                                                                                                                     versatile
                            tassium     salt  at  +60    °C  [13].  Transition      metals,
                           complexation behavior and allow for much more diverse structures.    and    especially       rare  earth     metals,    have     quite
                            versatile complexation behavior and allow for much more diverse structures.
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                                                     5 of 10
Molecules 2021, 26, x                                                                                                                        5 of 10




                           Figure
                            Figure2.2.Walden
                                      Walden Plot
                                               Plot of
                                                    of selected
                                                       selected rare
                                                                rare earth
                                                                     earth metal
                                                                           metal ionic
                                                                                  ionic liquids
                                                                                        liquids in
                                                                                                in aa range
                                                                                                      range of
                                                                                                            of 15–60
                                                                                                               15–60 °C
                                                                                                                     ◦ C in
                                                                                                                          in comparison
                                                                                                                             comparison
                           to the ideal KCl line, adapted   from Reference  [9] (Copyright   © 2021   Wiley–VCH   GmbH,
                            to the ideal KCl line, adapted from Reference [9] (Copyright © 2021 Wiley–VCH GmbH, Weinheim).   Weinheim).

                                   The
                                    The diversity
                                         diversity in    in properties
                                                            properties does
                                                                          does notnot endend inin these
                                                                                                  these transport
                                                                                                           transport properties,
                                                                                                                       properties, butbut extends
                                                                                                                                           extends
                           into
                            intoother
                                    otherattributes
                                            attributeswith  withmore
                                                                   more direct
                                                                          direct application
                                                                                    application   as well.   We We
                                                                                                      as well.    havehave
                                                                                                                        previously     shown
                                                                                                                              previously        that
                                                                                                                                             shown
                           the    solubilities     of   [REM][C8E5c]          ILs  in   different    solvents,    or
                            that the solubilities of [REM][C8E5c]3 ILs in different solvents, or rather the resulting
                                                                          3                                           rather   the   resulting   oc-
                           tanol/water        partition     coefficients    P,  are   highly    dependent       on  the
                            octanol/water partition coefficients P, are highly dependent on the associated cation, see   associated     cation,  see
                           Figure
                            Figure 22 [9].
                                        [9]. These
                                               These proof-of-concept
                                                         proof-of-concept separation
                                                                                separation experiments
                                                                                                experiments have have already
                                                                                                                        already shown
                                                                                                                                   shown that
                                                                                                                                            that the
                                                                                                                                                 the
                           otherwise
                            otherwise resource-
                                           resource- and   and labor-intensive
                                                                labor-intensive separation
                                                                                      separation of  of rare
                                                                                                         rare earth
                                                                                                               earth metals
                                                                                                                      metals isis accessible
                                                                                                                                   accessible with
                                                                                                                                               with
                           the
                            the use
                                  use of
                                       of alkyl
                                           alkyl ethylene
                                                    ethylene glycol
                                                                 glycol ether
                                                                         ether carboxylates.
                                                                                  carboxylates. The    The partition
                                                                                                             partition coefficients
                                                                                                                        coefficients areare greatly
                                                                                                                                             greatly
                           affected
                            affected by by the
                                             the presence
                                                   presence of   of other
                                                                    other ions,
                                                                            ions, providing
                                                                                    providing aa highly
                                                                                                      highly sensitive
                                                                                                                sensitive and
                                                                                                                            and tunable
                                                                                                                                  tunable system.
                                                                                                                                            system.
                            The unique
                           The     unique structure
                                             structure of   of the
                                                               the [C8E5c]
                                                                    [C8E5c] anion
                                                                                anion also
                                                                                         also makes
                                                                                               makes itit responsive
                                                                                                            responsive toto changes
                                                                                                                             changes in in pH,
                                                                                                                                           pH, due
                                                                                                                                                 due
                            to its
                           to   its carboxylic
                                     carboxylic acid,
                                                    acid, and
                                                            and changes
                                                                  changes in in temperature,
                                                                                 temperature, due to its ethylene glycol chain.
                                    This novel
                                   This   novel class
                                                    class ofof ionic
                                                               ionic liquids
                                                                      liquids shows
                                                                                 shows great
                                                                                           great promise
                                                                                                   promise in  in a multitude
                                                                                                                    multitude of applications
                                                                                                                                      applications
                            due to
                           due     to their
                                      their unique approach
                                                          approach to toliquefying
                                                                         liquefyingmetal  metalions.
                                                                                                  ions.InIncombination
                                                                                                              combinationwith withsuitable
                                                                                                                                     suitablemetals,
                                                                                                                                               met-
                            alkyl
                           als,      ethylene
                                 alkyl  ethylene   glycol
                                                      glycol ether  carboxylate
                                                                ether  carboxylate    ionic
                                                                                         ionicliquids
                                                                                                liquidscould
                                                                                                          couldbe beused
                                                                                                                      used as fluorescent
                                                                                                                                fluorescent dyes,
                                                                                                                                               dyes,
                            in synthesis
                           in   synthesisand   andcatalysis,
                                                      catalysis,ororasasprecursors
                                                                          precursorsfor     forstructured
                                                                                                 structuredceramics
                                                                                                                ceramicsoror    nanoparticles.
                                                                                                                              nanoparticles.        It
                                                                                                                                                It is
                            is clear   that   the   properties      of the   ionic   liquids    strongly     depend
                           clear that the properties of the ionic liquids strongly depend on the choice of cation, and on   the  choice   of cation,
                            and consequently,
                           consequently,        their their     application.
                                                         application.   However,  However,       the influence
                                                                                        the influence              of theshould
                                                                                                           of the anion    anion should       not be
                                                                                                                                    not be forgot-
                            forgotten:     it is  indubitably      responsible     for   much     of the   solution
                           ten: it is indubitably responsible for much of the solution and structuring behavior, and and   structuring    behavior,
                            andalso
                           has     has also
                                        beenbeen shown shown     to greatly
                                                            to greatly   affectaffect  fluorescence,
                                                                                   fluorescence,         enablingfluorescence
                                                                                                       enabling      fluorescenceininthe the visible
                                                                                                                                             visible
                            spectrum for
                           spectrum       for otherwise
                                                otherwise nonluminescent
                                                               nonluminescent metal   metal ions
                                                                                               ions [9].
                                                                                                      [9]. Variation
                                                                                                            Variation and
                                                                                                                       and modification
                                                                                                                             modification of  of the
                                                                                                                                                 the
                            anion     will surely    enable     the  production      of  tailor-made,      metal-based
                           anion will surely enable the production of tailor-made, metal-based ionic liquids.             ionic   liquids.

                            3. Surface Active Alkyl Ethylene Glycol Ether Carboxylates
                           3. Surface Active Alkyl Ethylene Glycol Ether Carboxylates
                                  In Reference [3], we have shown that the COMPLET concept can be used to liquefy
                                 In Reference [3], we have shown that the COMPLET concept can be used to liquefy
                            cationic surfactants such as long-chain alkylammonium ones by combining them with
                           cationic surfactants such as long-chain alkylammonium ones by combining them with
                            short-chain methyl tetra ethylene glycol ether carboxylates. How to directly incorporate
                           short-chain methyl tetra ethylene glycol ether carboxylates. How to directly incorporate
                            ethylene glycol groups into cationic surfactants to liquefy them with any type of anion, will
                           ethylene glycol groups into cationic surfactants to liquefy them with any type of anion,
                            be subject of several forthcoming papers, e.g., [4].
                           will be subject of several forthcoming papers, e.g., [4].
                                  By contrast, in the present section, we focus on surfactants of the type dodecyl ethylene
                                 By contrast, in the present section, we focus on surfactants of the type dodecyl eth-
                            glycol ether carboxylate with two or four ethylene glycol groups ([C12E2c] or [C12E4c])
                           ylene glycol ether carboxylate with two or four ethylene glycol groups ([C12E2c] or
                            and either choline (Ch) or triethanolammonium (TEA) as counterions, see Figure 3.
                           [C12E4c]) and either choline (Ch) or triethanolammonium (TEA) as counterions, see Fig-
                           ure 3.
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                                                            6 of 10
 Molecules 2021, 26, x                                                                                                                             6 of 10
 Molecules 2021, 26, x                                                                                                                            6 of 10




                            Figure3.3. The
                           Figure      The anions
                                           anions and
                                                  and cations
                                                      cations giving
                                                              giving SAILs,
                                                                     SAILs, as
                                                                            as discussed
                                                                               discussed in
                                                                                          in Section
                                                                                             Section 3.
                                                                                                     3.
                           Figure 3. The anions and cations giving SAILs, as discussed in Section 3.
                                  Thermal stability
                                  Thermal       stability is  is an
                                                                 an important
                                                                      important feature of Ionic Liquids.  Liquids. Commonly
                                                                                                                         Commonlyused      usedorganic
                                                                                                                                                   organic
                                  Thermal
                            solvents
                           solvents    are      stability is anby
                                        are characterized
                                              characterized          important     feature
                                                                        either a high
                                                                                  high    vapor
                                                                                          vaporof Ionic  Liquids.
                                                                                                   pressure
                                                                                                    pressure   or     Commonly
                                                                                                                oraalowlowboiling        used
                                                                                                                               boilingpoint,
                                                                                                                                          point, organic
                                                                                                                                                  ororboth.
                                                                                                                                                       both.
                            solvents
                            Since Ionic are Liquids
                                    Ionic    characterized     notbyhave
                                                          do not       either a appreciable
                                                                                 high vapor pressure
                                                                                                   vapor      or a low they boiling    point,   or both.in
                           Since            Liquids      do                  an appreciable        vapor pressure,
                                                                                                            pressure,       they cancan  bebe applied
                                                                                                                                               applied     in
                            Since
                            liquidIonic
                                     stateupLiquids
                                             up to    thedo
                                                  to the       not have an appreciable
                                                            temperature                           vapor pressure,
                                                                                              decomposition        [8].   they can be applied in
                           liquid   state                  temperature        of thermal decomposition              [8].
                            liquidTherefore,
                                    state up to the temperatureofofthe          thermal decomposition            [8].
                                  Therefore, thermal stability  stability of theSAILs SAILs   discussed
                                                                                                discussed  hereherewaswas studied
                                                                                                                               studiedusing    a thermo-
                                                                                                                                            using    a ther-
                                  Therefore,      thermal      stability   of the  SAILs     discussed    here   was     studied     using    a thermo-
                           mogravimetric analyzer TGA 7 from Perkin-Elmer (Waltham, MA, USA). Sampleswere
                            gravimetric       analyzer       TGA      7  from   Perkin-Elmer         (Waltham,       MA,      USA).     Samples        were
                            gravimetric
                            measured at    atanalyzer
                                               a heating     TGA of  7 from    Perkin-Elmer
                                                                              ◦C      –1,−applying  (Waltham,
                                                                                           1 , applying             MA, nitrogen
                                                                                                                             USA). Samples           were
                           measured               heating rate rate of10  10°C  minmin                 a continuous
                                                                                                            a  continuous                flow.flow.
                                                                                                                                   nitrogen       Decom-  De-
                            measured      at a heating rate
                            position temperatures              wereof   10 °C min–1,using
                                                                       determined        applying
                                                                                                onset a continuous
                                                                                                        points     of mass nitrogen     flow.
                                                                                                                                 loss, loss,
                                                                                                                                        defined Decom-
                                                                                                                                                     as the
                           composition        temperatures           were   determined using          onset    points      of mass             defined     as
                            position
                            intersectiontemperatures
                                             of the           werebefore
                                                                      determined      using onset   andpoints     of mass   to loss,   defined as      the
                           the  intersection        of baseline
                                                        the baseline          decomposition
                                                                           before    decomposition       the
                                                                                                           andtangent
                                                                                                                   the tangent  the mass
                                                                                                                                      to thelossmassversus
                                                                                                                                                         loss
                            intersection
                            temperature.     of the baseline before decomposition and the tangent to the mass loss versus
                           versus    temperature.
                            temperature.
                                  All the
                                        the compounds
                                              compounds tested    tested show
                                                                           show decomposition
                                                                                   decomposition only                             ◦ C. Decomposition
                                  All                                                                   only above
                                                                                                                above 200   200 °C.    Decomposition
                                  All  the
                            temperatures     compounds
                                                of   common      tested
                                                                   Ionic  show
                                                                          Liquids decomposition
                                                                                     can   be  found   only
                                                                                                       in  the above      200   °C.  Decomposition
                           temperatures of common Ionic Liquids                                            the same range [14].In
                                                                                                                same      range    [14].   Inthe
                                                                                                                                               thecase
                                                                                                                                                     caseofof
                            temperatures
                            the  pure           of common
                                         substances,       while  Ionic
                                                                     the  Liquids
                                                                          onset   ofcan   be found in the
                                                                                     decomposition         is  same
                                                                                                              at        range
                                                                                                                  slightly        [14]. In
                                                                                                                               higher       the case of
                                                                                                                                          temperatures
                           the pure substances, while the onset of decomposition is at slightly higher temperatures for
                            the  pure
                            forILs,
                                 Ch     substances,
                                      ILs,  the TEA        while
                                                          ILs       the onset
                                                                exhibit   higher of decomposition         is at temperatures.
                                                                                                                 slightly higher temperatures
                           Ch         the TEA       ILs exhibit      higher   bulkbulk     decomposition
                                                                                     decomposition        temperatures. BulkBulk               decompo-
                                                                                                                                         decomposition
                            for Ch   ILs,  the
                            sition temperatures  TEA     ILs   exhibit
                                                          are determined  higher   bulk   decomposition        temperatures.         Bulk    decompo-
                           temperatures         are determined           as the as  the intersection
                                                                                 intersection       betweenbetween       the tangent
                                                                                                                the tangent         to thetoinitial
                                                                                                                                               the initial
                                                                                                                                                       mass
                            sition
                            mass    temperatures
                                   loss   and            are determined
                                                 the tangent                    as the intersection       between      the    tangent to the       initial
                           loss  and    the  tangent       to thetomorethe more
                                                                             rapidrapid
                                                                                     massmass loss loss  at
                                                                                                    at higherhigher     temperatures.
                                                                                                                  temperatures.          NoNo      signifi-
                                                                                                                                               significant
                            mass   loss and the
                            cant difference           tangent to
                                                  in thermal          the more rapid
                                                                   destruction    occurs   massCh  loss at  higher    temperatures. eitherNo twosignifi-
                           difference     in thermal         destruction      occurs    forforCh oror   TEA
                                                                                                      TEA       species
                                                                                                              species        witheither
                                                                                                                           with                    or
                                                                                                                                                    orfour
                                                                                                                                                        four
                            cant difference in thermal destruction occurs for Ch or TEA species with either two or four
                            ethoxyunits
                           ethoxy     units in in the
                                                   the anionic
                                                        anionic part,
                                                                    part, see Figure 4.
                            ethoxy units in the anionic part, see Figure 4.




                            Figure 4. Temperature-dependent mass loss curves. Comparison of different counterions and de-
                           Figure 4.
                           Figure  4. Temperature-dependent
                                      Temperature-dependent mass
                                                              massloss
                                                                   losscurves.
                                                                        curves.Comparison
                                                                               Comparisonof
                                                                                          ofdifferent
                                                                                             differentcounterions
                                                                                                       counterionsand
                                                                                                                   anddegree
                                                                                                                       de-
                            gree of ethoxylation, adapted from Reference [15].
                           gree of ethoxylation, adapted from Reference [15].
                           of ethoxylation, adapted from Reference [15].
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                                            7 of 10




                                         As can be seen in Figure 4, TEA leads to more resistant derivatives, while the point
                                    of decomposition decreases by 40 ◦ C for choline species. Table 1 contains additional data
                                    for the four SAILs presented here. Further details about the experimental methods and
                                    the characterization of more SAILs can be found in [15]. Note that all of the SAILs have
                                    glass transition temperatures far below 0 ◦ C, exhibit high viscosities at room temperature,
                                    and, for anionic surfactants, show relatively low critical micelle concentrations (cmc) when
                                    dissolved in water. They all exhibit a pseudoplastic behavior at room temperature.

      Table 1. Decomposition temperature, glass transition temperature, and viscosities at two temperatures for the four salts
      (SAILs) considered, together with their rheological behavior. For aqueous Scheme 15.

                                                                             Viscosity 20 ◦ C   Viscosity 80 ◦ C
  Composition         T Decomp. [◦ C]   T glass Trans. [◦ C]   Cmc [mol/L]                                               Rheology
                                                                                 [Pa s]             [Pa s]
  [TEA][C12E2c]            222                −39.0             2 × 10−4          ~100                ~4               pseudoplastic
  [Ch][C12E2c]             240                −44.0             2 × 10−4           ~30                ~5               pseudoplastic
                                                                                                                   pseudoplastic ≤ 70 ◦ C
  [TEA][C12E4c]            234                −42.0             2 × 10−4           ~60            30 × 10−3
                                                                                                                    Newtonian > 70 ◦ C
                                                                                                                   pseudoplastic ≤ 60 ◦ C
  [Ch][C12E4c]             241                −49.5             2 × 10−4           ~80            10 × 10−3
                                                                                                                    Newtonian > 60 ◦ C


                                        Unlike simple anionic surfactants, these SAILs usually only have a low tendency to
                                    form viscous liquid crystalline phases and are liquid at high concentrations and in absence
                                    of water.

                                    4. The Special Case of M+ C8 EO8 CH2 COO−
                                          With x = 8 and y = 8, octyl octaethylene glycol ether carboxylic acid (C8 EO8 CH2 COOH)
                                    with its commercial name Akypo LF2, is a surfactant consisting of a rather small hydropho-
                                    bic and a much larger hydrophilic moiety. The comparatively long ethylene glycol chain
                                    ensures a sufficiently low melting point to keep the surfactant in its liquid state at room tem-
                                    perature, even in absence of water. As demonstrated above, C8 EO5 CH2 COOH ([H][C8E5c])
                                    (Section 2) and similar molecules (Section 3) can be deprotonated and combined with
                                    any metal cation, while retaining their liquid state, rendering them room temperature
                                    ionic liquids. Unsurprisingly, Akypo LF2 ([H][C8E8c]) can be treated similarly to obtain
                                    ionic liquids.
                                          In a recent paper [16], we reported on the aqueous phase behavior of [H][C8E8c] and
                                    elucidated its microstructuring over a wide range of concentrations by small-angle X-ray
                                    scattering (SAXS). Within the scope of that work, we also analyzed the effect of CaCl2
                                    and NaOH on the phase behavior. Apart from a small coacervation regime at very low
                                    surfactant concentrations (<1 wt.%), the acid form features a phase behavior similar to that
                                    of the nonionic surfactant C8 EO8 [17] with a typical clouding phenomenon. The lower
                                    critical solution temperature (LCST) of [H][C8E8c] was found to be 66 ◦ C, thus significantly
                                    lower than the LCST of 96 ◦ C reported for C8 EO8 . This difference can be attributed to
                                    enhanced intermicellar interactions, enabled by the additional carboxylic acid moieties.
                                    Ca2+ ions can act as intermicellar bridging agents between two carboxylate functions, as
                                    such lowering the LCST to 49 ◦ C. As opposed to that, deprotonation of [H][C8E8c] with
                                    NaOH enhances its ionic character, completely suppressing the clouding phenomenon for
                                    [Na]0.5 [H]0.5 [C8E8c]. Yet, the phase behavior is remarkably simple in all cases. No liquid
                                    crystalline or reversed phases are observed, and the systems are isotropic, micellar liquids
                                    of relatively low viscosity at all ratios with water and all temperatures (above the critical
                                    micelle concentration and below the cloud point).
                                          A careful SAXS study revealed that [H][C8E8c] forms direct spherical micelles of
                                    constant size (hydrocarbon core radius RHC ≈ 1.2 nm, aggregation number Nagg ≈ 30) and
                                    shape over the whole concentration range. Only at concentrations above 70 wt.%, when
                                    there is no longer any bulk water due to hydration of EO-groups, does the size start to
                                    decrease gradually. In the almost water-free state, Nagg is reduced to 8 and RHC is reduced
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                                                                           8 of 10


      Molecules 2021, 26, x                                                                                                                              8 of 10

                                         to approximately 0.8 nm. Obviously, the normal core-shell micelles cannot persist without
                                         any bulk water. Spherical micelles are then only possible, if the hydrophilic headgroups
                                            any bulk water. Spherical micelles are then only possible, if the hydrophilic headgroups
                                         interdigitate and form a hydrophilic medium of more or less hydrated headgroups, in
                                            interdigitate and form a hydrophilic medium of more or less hydrated headgroups, in
                                         which
                                            whichthe
                                                   thehydrophobic    cores,consisting
                                                       hydrophobic cores,    consisting    of hydrocarbon
                                                                                       of hydrocarbon       chains,
                                                                                                       chains,        are dispersed.
                                                                                                               are dispersed.         Indeed,
                                                                                                                              Indeed, we
                                         wecould
                                             couldsubstantiate
                                                     substantiate
                                                               this idea through a combination of SAXS and vapor pressure osmom- os-
                                                                   this idea  through     a combination   of SAXS    and  vapor  pressure
                                         mometry     measurements.
                                            etry measurements.   FigureFigure   5 is a sketch
                                                                        5 is a sketch          of the observed
                                                                                       of the observed structuresstructures
                                                                                                                  at high andatlow
                                                                                                                                high and low
                                                                                                                                   water
                                         water  concentrations.
                                            concentrations.




             Figure 5. Scaled sketch of the two regimes observed in binary [H][C8E8c] water solutions. Left: the common core-shell
              5. Scaledof
      Figurestructuring    sketch
                             direct of the two
                                    micelles:     regimes observed
                                                a hydrocarbon     core (RHCin =binary
                                                                                1.2 nm,[H][C8E8c]
                                                                                        shown in yellow)waterissolutions.
                                                                                                                 surrounded   Left:
                                                                                                                                by athe  common
                                                                                                                                      hydrated        core-shell
                                                                                                                                                 ethylene
      structuring   of direct
            glycol shell       micelles:
                          (shown           a hydrocarbon
                                   in green);                  core (RHC
                                                the bulk represented          = 1.2contains
                                                                          in blue   nm, shown       in yellow)
                                                                                             monomers            is surrounded
                                                                                                            at cmc.                  by a hydrated
                                                                                                                     Right: the confined     hydrocarbonethylene
      glycolcore
             shell(HC)  regime
                    (shown       observed
                              in green);  thein bulk
                                                water-poor    solution
                                                      represented     in with
                                                                         blue interdigitated    headgroups
                                                                                contains monomers              andRight:
                                                                                                          at cmc.    the absence   of bulk water;
                                                                                                                            the confined            in this core
                                                                                                                                             hydrocarbon
            regime, observed
      (HC) regime     the interparticle  distance gives
                                 in water-poor             a scattering
                                                    solution             peak at D* = 2π/q
                                                               with interdigitated            max. As can be inferred from osmotic pressure meas-
                                                                                        headgroups       and the absence of bulk water; in this regime,
            urements, the compression of the water-poor ethylene glycol layer (tw) is responsible of the stability of the structure. The
      the interparticle distance gives a scattering peak at D* = 2π/qmax . As can be inferred from osmotic pressure measurements,
            figure was reused from Reference [16] (Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc.).
      the compression of the water-poor ethylene glycol layer (tw ) is responsible of the stability of the structure. The figure was
      reused from Reference [16] (Copyright        The©effects
                                                          2021 Elsevier
                                                                 of CaCl2Inc.).
                                                                             addition and transformation of [H][C8E8c] to [Na]0.5[H]0.5[C8E8c]
                                            (pH = pKa ≈ 4) can be summarized as follows. Neither the addition of CaCl2 nor the addi-
                                            tionThe  effects changes
                                                  of NaOH      of CaCl2the   addition
                                                                                general and    transformation
                                                                                          structuring                 of [H][C8E8c]
                                                                                                          of the system.    However, to  both[Na]  0.5 [H]0.5
                                                                                                                                                partially      [C8E8c]
                                                                                                                                                             sup-
                                        (pH     =  pKa    ≈   4) can    be  summarized          as   follows.    Neither      the
                                            press interdigitation and decrease the area per molecule 𝑎. In this case, a reduction ofaddition     of  CaCl    2 nor
                                                                                                                                                                 𝑎 the
                                        addition     of   NaOH      changes      the general     structuring      of   the  system.
                                            corresponds to an increase of Nagg. Yet, the mechanism leading to the partial suppression   However,      both    partially
                                        suppress      interdigitation
                                            of interdigitation              and decrease
                                                                    is different               the area
                                                                                   in both cases.      Ca2+ per   can bridgea.carboxylate
                                                                                                            ionsmolecule          In this case,    a reduction
                                                                                                                                                functions      be- of a
                                            tween or within
                                        corresponds                 micelles, of
                                                           to an increase        inhibiting
                                                                                    Nagg . Yet,interdigitation
                                                                                                   the mechanism   either    way. Nevertheless,
                                                                                                                          leading    to the partialCa      2+ en-
                                                                                                                                                        suppression
                                        of hances     micellar attraction.
                                            interdigitation        is different  Deprotonation
                                                                                    in both cases.        Ca2+ ionswith
                                                                                                      of [H][C8E8c]       can NaOH,
                                                                                                                               bridge on      the other hand,
                                                                                                                                          carboxylate       functions
                                            enhances      micellar   repulsion    by  increasing     the  charge,   consequently
                                        between or within micelles, inhibiting interdigitation either way. Nevertheless,              impeding     headgroup Ca2+
                                            interdigitation
                                        enhances       micellar at attraction.
                                                                    the same time. Deprotonation of [H][C8E8c] with NaOH, on the other hand,
                                                   Since  the  publication
                                        enhances micellar repulsion            of our  referenced work
                                                                                  by increasing               [16], [Na][C8E8c]
                                                                                                       the charge,      consequently and [Ca][C8E8c]      2 were
                                                                                                                                           impeding headgroup
                                            prepared with less than 0.5 wt.% residual water. Both are isotropic ILs above their glass
                                        interdigitation at the same time.
                                            transition point. [Na][C8E8c] is liquid above 27.5 °C, whereas [Ca][C8E8c]2 is already liq-
                                                Since the publication of our referenced work [16], [Na][C8E8c] and [Ca][C8E8c]2 were
                                            uid above 19.5 °C. These ionic liquids will be investigated by SAXS in the future, but ex-
                                        prepared       with less than 0.5 wt.% residual water. Bothconsist
                                            trapolation of our published data suggests that they also
                                                                                                                         are isotropic      ILs above their glass
                                                                                                                                 of spherical hydrocarbon
                                        transition      point.     [Na][C8E8c]       is  liquid     above     27.5  ◦ C, whereas [Ca][C8E8c] is already
                                            cores, dispersed in a hydrophilic medium of interdigitated headgroups. If this is the                        2 case,
                                        liquid     above    19.5   ◦ C. These ionic liquids will be investigated by SAXS in the future, but
                                            these ionic liquids are highly interesting, because they possess (a) hydrophobic
                                        extrapolation
                                            nanodropletsofdispersed
                                                                 our published        data suggests
                                                                             in a hydrophilic       medium thatwith
                                                                                                                 theya also
                                                                                                                          largeconsist
                                                                                                                                interface of and
                                                                                                                                              spherical
                                                                                                                                                   (b) thehydrocar-
                                                                                                                                                              car-
                                        bon    cores, dispersed
                                            boxylate                   in a hydrophilic
                                                        functions enable        charge transfer medium
                                                                                                    between  ofboth
                                                                                                                interdigitated
                                                                                                                       domains, since headgroups.
                                                                                                                                           the EO-chains If this
                                                                                                                                                               areis the
                                        case,    these
                                            highly       ionic liquids
                                                      flexible.  Owing are       highly
                                                                            to those       interesting,
                                                                                       features,             because
                                                                                                     the [C8E8c]         theyseem
                                                                                                                     SAILs     possessto be(a)  hydrophobic
                                                                                                                                              very  promising nan-
                                            solventsdispersed
                                        odroplets       for catalytic in purposes.
                                                                         a hydrophilic Nanoparticle
                                                                                             medium synthesis
                                                                                                           with a large in such   a confined
                                                                                                                            interface    and (b)environment
                                                                                                                                                    the carboxylate
                                            may    also  be  conceivable.
                                        functions enable charge transfer between both domains, since the EO-chains are highly
                                         flexible. Owing to those features, the [C8E8c] SAILs seem to be very promising solvents
                                         for catalytic purposes. Nanoparticle synthesis in such a confined environment may also
                                         be conceivable.
      Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                                                              9 of 10
Molecules 2021, 26, x                                                                                                                                9 of 10



                                              Concerning catalysis of organic reactions, it is also worth considering the phase
                                      Concerning
                                       behavior of the   catalysis
                                                             SAILsofonorganic       reactions,
                                                                           the addition             it is also worth
                                                                                              of hydrophobic              considering
                                                                                                                     solvents    and water.  the phase
                                                                                                                                                   Ternary  be-phase
                                 havior   of the SAILs
                                       diagrams       of the on   the addition
                                                              systems               of hydrophobic
                                                                          [H][C8E8c]/H                      solvents and water. Ternary phase
                                                                                              2 O/n-dodecane and [Na]0.5 [H]0.5 [C8E8c]/H2 O/n-
                                 diagrams     of theatsystems
                                       dodecane           T ≈ 23 [H][C8E8c]/H
                                                                    ◦ C are given and  2O/n-dodecane
                                                                                            compared inand          [Na]6.0.5[H]
                                                                                                               Figure        Note0.5[C8E8c]/H
                                                                                                                                     that the glass 2O/n-do-
                                                                                                                                                          transition
                                 decaneof at
                                          dry T [Na]
                                                 ≈ 23 0.5
                                                        °C[H]
                                                            are0.5given
                                                                   [C8E8c]and(<0.5
                                                                                compared
                                                                                       wt.% H   in2 O)
                                                                                                    Figure    6. Note
                                                                                                        is shifted    to that
                                                                                                                          lower thetemperatures
                                                                                                                                      glass transition       of
                                                                                                                                                         compared
                                       to that of neat [Na][C8E8c]. It is liquid at temperatures above approximately 22–23 ◦ C.
                                 dry [Na]  0.5 [H] 0.5 [C8E8c]   (<0.5   wt.%   H 2 O)   is shifted    to lower    temperatures        compared        to  that
                                 of neat
                                       In [Na][C8E8c].
                                          both cases, atItany    is liquid   at temperatures
                                                                      surfactant    concentration,     above
                                                                                                          onlyapproximately
                                                                                                                  a certain amount    22–23 of °C.    In both can
                                                                                                                                                n-dodecane
                                 cases,beatsolubilized.
                                            any surfactant    Any concentration,
                                                                      excess n-dodecaneonly a certain       amount of This
                                                                                                  phase separates.          n-dodecane        can be solu-
                                                                                                                                   can be explained          by the
                                 bilized.  Any excess of
                                       incorporation        n-dodecane
                                                               n-dodecane    phase
                                                                                intoseparates.
                                                                                        the hydrophobicThis cancores
                                                                                                                   be explained       by the incorpora-
                                                                                                                          of the (interdigitated)          micelles,
                                 tion of  n-dodecane
                                       which                into the to
                                                 is only possible        hydrophobic        cores of
                                                                            a certain extent,        as the (interdigitated)          micelles, which
                                                                                                               packing of the surfactant                     is is
                                                                                                                                                      molecules
                                 only possible
                                       constrained to a and
                                                          certain
                                                               most  extent,
                                                                       likelyasonly
                                                                                 the allows
                                                                                        packingspherical
                                                                                                    of the surfactant
                                                                                                                structures. molecules
                                                                                                                               Further,isit constrained
                                                                                                                                                is likely that the
                                 and most    likely only
                                       separating            allows spherical
                                                        n-dodecane                   structures.
                                                                         phase contains        almost Further,    it is likelydue
                                                                                                           no surfactant        thattothe itsseparating
                                                                                                                                               inability to  n-form
                                 dodecane
                                       reversedphase    contains almost
                                                     structures.              no surfactant
                                                                      Since there     is also a duephase to separation
                                                                                                             its inabilityin  to the
                                                                                                                                  form    reversed
                                                                                                                                       case   of the struc-
                                                                                                                                                         water-free
                                 tures.SAIL,
                                        Sinceunlike,
                                                 there isfor   example,
                                                            also   a phasethe    case of the
                                                                              separation      in nonionic
                                                                                                  the case of  surfactant     C8 EO6SAIL,
                                                                                                                  the water-free        , which      is completely
                                                                                                                                                 unlike,    for
                                       miscible
                                 example,          withof
                                             the case      n-dodecane
                                                             the nonionic   [18], a simpleCextraction
                                                                               surfactant         8EO6, which   of possible    reaction
                                                                                                                    is completely            products
                                                                                                                                        miscible      with might
                                                                                                                                                             n- be
                                       feasible.
                                 dodecane          [H][C8E8c]
                                                [18],   a simplecan       uptake about
                                                                      extraction             10 wt.%reaction
                                                                                     of possible         n-dodecane,       and [Na]
                                                                                                                      products          0.5 [H]
                                                                                                                                    might      be0.5 [C8E8c]
                                                                                                                                                     feasible.up to
                                       13 wt.%.
                                 [H][C8E8c]      can uptake about 10 wt.% n-dodecane, and [Na]0.5[H]0.5[C8E8c] up to 13 wt.%.




                                 FigureFigure
                                         6. Ternary
                                                  6. phase Ternary
                                                            diagrams of [H][C8E8c]/H
                                                                      phase    diagrams2O/n-dodecane () and [Na]0.5[H]0.5[C8E8c]/H2O
                                                                                            of [H][C8E8c]/H2 O/n-dodecane () and
                                 /n-dodecane    () at a temperature of 23 °C (±1 °C). Concentrations
                                       [Na]0.5 [H]0.5 [C8E8c]/H2 O /n-dodecane (•) at a temperature   are given
                                                                                                            of 23in ◦wt.%.
                                                                                                                     C (±The   precision
                                                                                                                           1 ◦ C). Concentra-
                                 in w(n-dodecane) is usually ±0.5 wt. %, whereas the deviation of the other weights is negligible; 1ϕ
                                       tions are given in wt.%. The precision in w(n-dodecane) is usually ±0.5 wt. %, whereas the deviation
                                 denotes a monophasic system, and 2ϕ, realms of existence of two liquids in equilibrium.
                                       of the other weights is negligible; 1φ denotes a monophasic system, and 2φ, realms of existence of
                                       two liquids in equilibrium.
                                 5. Conclusions and Outlook
                                      Compared
                                       5. Conclusionsto classical  ionic liquids (ILs), the ILs based on COMPLET (Concept of
                                                          and Outlook
                                 Melting Point     Lowering    due
                                             Compared to classical  to ionic
                                                                        Ethoxylation)      offerthe
                                                                               liquids (ILs),      numerous
                                                                                                       ILs basedadvantages.
                                                                                                                    on COMPLET     They  are very
                                                                                                                                     (Concept    of Melt-
                                 easy to  prepare,   they  are cheap,   exhibit   low   toxicity,   and    the  organic
                                       ing Point Lowering due to Ethoxylation) offer numerous advantages. They are very   part is  readily  biode-easy to
                                 gradable   whenthey
                                       prepare,     appropriate
                                                        are cheap,simple
                                                                     exhibitions
                                                                              lowsuch    as Naand
                                                                                     toxicity,   +, Fe2+, etc. are chosen. Further, they can
                                                                                                       the organic part is readily biodegradable
                                 be used
                                       whento liquefy  virtually
                                               appropriate        anyions
                                                             simple     cation,
                                                                            suchbeasitNamono-,    di-,
                                                                                           + , Fe2+      or are
                                                                                                     , etc.  triple-charged,   at room
                                                                                                                  chosen. Further,    theytemper-
                                                                                                                                            can be used
                                 ature.toSince  the virtually
                                          liquefy   ILs presented     here are
                                                               any cation,     beliquefied
                                                                                   it mono-,via     theorhigh
                                                                                                 di-,            flexibility ofatthe
                                                                                                            triple-charged,          organic
                                                                                                                                   room        ani-
                                                                                                                                          temperature.
                                 ons, simple
                                       Since thecations  such as Nahere
                                                   ILs presented      + and Li+ can be used as well as Fe2+ or Fe3+ or Eu3+ or, prob-
                                                                            are liquefied via the high flexibility of the organic anions,
                                 ably, simple
                                        any other   cation
                                                cations     that
                                                         such  asisNa + and Li+ can
                                                                    interesting    for catalysis
                                                                                        be used as    orwell
                                                                                                         thatas    Fe2+be
                                                                                                                must       Fe3+ or Eu
                                                                                                                        orextracted     3+ or,
                                                                                                                                       and  recov-
                                                                                                                                               probably,
                                 ered. any
                                        Theother
                                              anions   can  also be   surface-active.     Although        surface-active    ILs   (SAILs)
                                                   cation that is interesting for catalysis or that must be extracted and recovered.        are  al- The
                                 readyanions
                                         known,   thealso
                                                can    COMPLET-based
                                                          be surface-active. SAILs     offer anionic
                                                                                 Although                surfactants,
                                                                                                surface-active           which are
                                                                                                                    ILs (SAILs)    aremuch   more
                                                                                                                                       already   known,
                                 relevant   for large applications
                                       the COMPLET-based          SAILsthan   cationic
                                                                          offer   anionic ones.   They arewhich
                                                                                              surfactants,      available   in large
                                                                                                                        are much       quantities,
                                                                                                                                    more   relevant for
                                 they large
                                       are easily   dilutablethan
                                              applications     with   water ones.
                                                                   cationic   and hydrophobic
                                                                                      They are available solvents,   depending
                                                                                                                 in large           on the
                                                                                                                           quantities,  theyalkyl-
                                                                                                                                               are easily
                                 chain length, and the formation of highly viscous liquid crystals upon water dilution can
                                 be widely avoided.
Molecules 2021, 26, 4034                                                                                                            10 of 10




                                   dilutable with water and hydrophobic solvents, depending on the alkyl-chain length, and
                                   the formation of highly viscous liquid crystals upon water dilution can be widely avoided.
                                        On the other hand, COMPLET-based ILs offer several advantages just as other ILs:
                                   they are of low volatility and liquid and stable over a wide temperature range. Finally, the
                                   properties, ranging from surfactant-like via hydrotrope-like to purely solvent-like, can be
                                   tuned at will by conveniently choosing the appropriate alkyl-chain length, typically C1 to
                                   C12, provided that the number of ethylene glycol groups is sufficient.
                                        Given all these advantages, we believe that this type of ILs may have a significant
                                   future and impact on improved industrial processes and products. We invite researchers
                                   interested in Ionic Liquids to try these and to further deepen our knowledge on them.

                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, W.K., E.M., P.D. and M.R.; writing—original draft prepa-
                                   ration, W.K., E.M., P.D. and M.R.; writing—review and editing, W.K., E.M., P.D. and M.R.; supervision,
                                   W.K.; project administration, W.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
                                   the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                   Data Availability Statement: Additional data are available on request to the authors.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
                                   Sample Availability: Samples of the compounds are not available from the authors.

References
1.    Häckl, K.; Kunz, W. Some aspects of green solvents. C. R. Acad. Sci. 2018, 21, 572–580. [CrossRef]
2.    Kunz, W.; Zemb, T.; Harrar, A. Using ionic liquids to formulate microemulsions: Current state of affairs. Curr. Opin. Colloid
      Interface Sci. 2012, 17, 205–211. [CrossRef]
3.    Müller, E.; Zahnweh, L.; Estrine, B.; Zech, O.; Allolio, C.; Heilmann, J.; Kunz, W. Oligoether Carboxylate Counterions: An
      Innovative Way Towards Surfactant Ionic Liquids. J. Molec. Liq. 2018, 251, 61–69. [CrossRef]
4.    Braun, L.; Kellermeier, M.; Engelhardt, N.; Oetter, G.; Engert, S.; Kunz, W. A new type of cationic surfactant: The insertion of
      ethoxy groups as a way towards soluble catanionic mixtures at equimolar ratio. (in preparation)
5.    Klein, R.; Zech, O.; Maurer, E.; Kellermeier, M.; Kunz, W. Oligoether Carboxylates–Task Specific Room-Temperature Ionic Liquids.
      J. Phys. Chem. B 2011, 115, 8961–8969. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Binnemans, K. Lanthanides and Actinides in Ionic Liquids. Chem. Rev. 2007, 107, 2592–2614. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.    Prodius, D.; Mudring, A.V. Rare earth metal-containing ionic liquids. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2018, 363, 1–16. [CrossRef]
8.    Ionic Liquids in Synthesis, 1st ed.; Wasserscheid, P.; Welton, T. (Eds.) Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, Germany, 2002.
9.    Rothe, M.; Tress, M.; Allacher, C.; Nürnberger, P.; Kunz, W. Ionic Liquids [M3+ ][A– ]3 with three-valent cations and their possible
      use to easily separate rare earth metals. Chem. Eur. J. (submitted in May 2021).
10.   Austen Angell, C.; Ansari, Y.; Zhao, Z. Ionic Liquids: Past, present and future. Faraday Discuss 2012, 154, 9–27. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
11.   Xu, W.; Cooper, E.I.; Austen Angell, C. Ionic Liquids: Ion Mobilities, Glass Temperatures, and Fragilities. J. Phys. Chem. B 2003,
      107, 6170–6178. [CrossRef]
12.   Zech, O.; Hunger, J.; Sangoro, J.R.; Iacob, C.; Kremer, F.; Kunz, W.; Buchner, R. Correlation between polarity parameters and
      dielectric properties of [Na][TOTO]–a sodium ionic liquid. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2010, 12, 14341–14350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Zech, O.; Kellermeier, M.; Thomaier, S.; Maurer, E.; Klein, R.; Schreiner, C.; Kunz, W. Alkali Metal Oligoether Carboxylates–A
      New Class of Ionic Liquids. Chem. Eur. J. 2009, 15, 1341–1345. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Zhou, Z.; Matsumoto, H.; Tatsumi, K. Low-Melting, Low-Viscous, Hydrophobic Ionic Liquids: Aliphatic Quaternary Ammonium
      Salts with Perfluoroalkyltrifluoroborates. Chem. Eur. J. 2005, 11, 752–766. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Maurer, E. Melting and Aggregation Behaviour of Novel Bio-Compatible Anionic, Cationic and Catanionic Surfactant Systems.
      Ph.D. Thesis, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 2011.
16.   Denk, P.; El Maangar, A.; Lal, J.; Kleber, D.; Zemb, T.; Kunz, W. Phase diagrams and microstructures of aqueous short alkyl chain
      polyethylene glycol ether carboxylate and carboxylic acid triblock surfactant solutions. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2021, 590, 375–386.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.   Mitchell, D.J.; Tiddy, G.J.T.; Waring, L.; Bostock, T.; McDonald, M.P. Phase behaviour of polyoxyethylene surfactants with water.
      Mesophase structures and partial miscibility (cloud points). J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 1 1983, 79, 975–1000. [CrossRef]
18.   Marland, J.S.; Mulley, B.A. A phase-rule study of multiple-phase formation in a model emulsion system containing water,
      n-octanol, n-dodecane and/a non-ionic surface-active agent at 10 and 25◦ . J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 1971, 23, 561–572. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
