                         Author Manuscript
                         Accepted for publication in a peer-reviewed journal

                                                                    National Institute of Standards and Technology • U.S. Department of Commerce

                                   Published in final edited form as:
                                    J Chem Eng Data. 2015 November ; 60(12): 3483–3495. doi:10.1021/acs.jced.5b00751.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                   Apparatus to measure the vapor pressure of slowly
                                   decomposing compounds from 1 Pa to 105 Pa
                                   Robert F. Berg
                                   Sensor Science Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology Gaithersburg, Maryland,
                                   20899-8411
                                   Robert F. Berg: robert.berg@nist.gov


                                   Abstract
                                        This article describes an apparatus and method for measuring vapor pressures in the range from 1
                                        Pa to 105 Pa. Its three distinctive elements are : (1) the static pressure measurements were made
                                        with only a small temperature difference between the vapor and the condensed phase, (2) the
                                        sample was degassed in situ, and (3) the temperature range extended up to 200 °C. The apparatus
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        was designed to measure metal-organic precursors, which often are toxic, pyrophoric, or unstable.
                                        Vapor pressures are presented for naphthalene, ferrocene, diethyl phthalate, and TEMAH
                                        (tetrakisethylmethylaminohafnium). Also presented are data for the temperature-dependent
                                        decomposition rate of TEMAH.


                                   1. Introduction
                                                    Making a modern microprocessor requires half of the elements in the periodic table, many of
                                                    which are metals that are used in features such as conducting lines (Cu), dielectric layers
                                                    (HfO2), and diffusion barriers (TaN). The metal often arrives at the silicon wafer as the
                                                    vapor of a metal-organic precursor, and the chemists who design the precursor must
                                                    compromise between a large vapor pressure and other desirable properties such as thermal
                                                    stability [ 1]. Knowing the precursor’s vapor pressure is useful because it determines the
                                                    behavior of the vapor delivery device.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                    The present apparatus was built for metal-organic precursors, which are typically used at
                                                    temperatures from 20 °C to 200 °C and can have vapor pressures in the range from 1 Pa to
                                                    105 Pa. They are often toxic, pyrophoric, or unstable, so the apparatus included safety
                                                    features, and the measurements and analysis allowed for the possibility of slow
                                                    decomposition. The apparatus and method had three distinctive elements: (1) the static
                                                    pressure measurements were made with only a 1 K temperature difference between the
                                                    vapor and the condensed phase, (2) the sample was degassed in situ, and (3) the temperature
                                                    range extended up to 200 °C.

                                                    Reviews of techniques to measure the vapor pressure of pure liquids and solids include
                                                    articles or chapters by Ambrose [2,3], Verevkin [4], Růžička et al. [5], Raal and
                                                    Ramjugernath [6], and Raal and Mühlbauer [7]. Verevkin mentions five methods to measure
                                                    vapor pressure : ebulliometric, effusion, static, transpiration, and calorimetric. The
                                                    ebulliometric (boiling) method is accurate because it can precisely compare the unknown
                         Berg                                                                                                     Page 2


                                        vapor pressure of a liquid to the known vapor pressure of a reference liquid; however, it has
                                        difficulties below 1 kPa [5], and the samples must be liquid and relatively large (~10 cm3).
                                        The effusion method, which measures the force or the mass loss due to the ejection of vapor
                                        from a sample holder, uses only a small sample; however, it requires a mean free path of at
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        least a few mm, which makes it unsuitable above 10 Pa. Of the remaining methods, the static
                                        method used here is the most accurate [5], and it can be applied at any pressure for which
                                        one has a suitable sensor, from less than 1 Pa to more than 10 MPa. Examples of static
                                        method apparatuses can be found in References [8–15].

                                        The static method is simply a measurement of the pressure of vapor in equilibrium with a
                                        condensed sample. It requires steady conditions, with the sample located at the coldest part
                                        of the manifold; otherwise, evaporation and condensation slowly move the sample and cause
                                        drift of the measured pressure. The usual practice is to hold the pressure gauge at a high,
                                        fixed temperature while varying the sample temperature (Figure 1a). A less common,
                                        alternate practice is to maintain a fixed difference between the temperatures of the pressure
                                        gauge and the sample (Figure 1b). The alternate practice was implemented here by putting
                                        both the sample and the pressure gauge into a temperature-controlled oven and using a
                                        thermoelectric device [16]to control the sample temperature Tsample. The oven varied the
                                        temperature Tair of the air surrounding the pressure gauge, and the device cooled the sample
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        by the fixed difference Tair- Tsample. Keeping the temperature difference small reduced
                                        problems caused by thermal transpiration at low pressures, and it decreased the
                                        decomposition rate of the vapor for unstable samples.

                                        The sample volume was small, about 1 cm3, which reduced the risk of an accident and the
                                        costs of handling a toxic or pyrophoric sample. A small sample also can be degassed more
                                        quickly. Degassing the sample while it is in the apparatus eliminated the need for a separate
                                        distillation apparatus, and it allowed the sample to be measured immediately after it was
                                        degassed. In situ degassing is especially useful for a decomposing sample because volatile
                                        decomposition products can be removed between sets of vapor pressure measurements.

                                        The remainder of this article describes the apparatus, its operation, and the results obtained
                                        for four compounds. A companion article [17] discusses the causes of time dependence in
                                        the pressure measurements.
NIST Author Manuscript




                            2. Apparatus
                            2.1 Hot manifold
                                        As shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, the apparatus had two gas manifolds, a hot manifold
                                        contained in a convection oven and a room temperature manifold. The hot manifold
                                        comprised the sample tube, two capacitance diaphragm pressure gauges (CDG), and a cold
                                        trap, all of which were connected by pneumatic valves and metal gasket fittings (1/4 inch (6
                                        mm) silver-plated nickel VCR[ 18]). The sample tube was surrounded by an aluminum
                                        block fitted with a thermistor, a platinum resistance thermometer, and two thermoelectric
                                        elements[ 16]. The thermoelectric elements kept the temperature of the sample tube 1 K
                                        colder than that of the oven.



                                         J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                   Page 3


                                       The volume of the sample tube, the CDGs, and their connecting tubing was only 29 cm3. A
                                       volume this small allowed the vapor to be pumped out many times before depleting the
                                       sample. Such pumping was used when zeroing the CDGs and when degassing the sample by
                                       cyclic pumping.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                       The sample tube was constructed by welding an end cap and a VCR fitting onto a thin-
                                       walled stainless steel tube. Because the wall thickness was only 0.07 mm, the sample
                                       temperature was well controlled by the thermoelectric block and variations of the oven’s air
                                       temperature had a negligible effect.

                                       There were three layers of temperature control. The first layer was the laboratory room
                                       temperature, which was controlled to a precision of 0.2 K. Large variations of room
                                       temperature or humidity had little effect on the sample temperature, but they did perturb the
                                       CDG electronics. The second layer was the oven (Memmert UFE-500[ 18]), which had a
                                       volume of 53 L and could be controlled up to 100 °C with a precision of 0.1 K, and at higher
                                       temperatures with a precision of 0.5 K. The third layer was the thermoelectric block that
                                       surrounded the sample tube. This device operated at temperatures as high as 200 °C while
                                       controlling the sample with a precision of 0.02 K; below 110 °C the precision was 0.002 K.
                                       Table 1 summarizes the layers of temperature control.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                       The CDGs (MKS model 616 [18]) were differential pressure gauges with ranges of 1.3 kPa
                                       and 130 kPa. They were designed for operation at temperatures as high as 300 °C.

                                       The pneumatic valves (Fujikin FWB(R)-71-6.35-2 [18]) were all-metal diaphragm valves
                                       designed to operate at temperatures as high as 300 °C. The cold trap was the tube -in-tube
                                       design indicated in Figure 2; during purification it was immersed in a small coolant bath.

                            2.2 Room temperature manifold
                                       The room temperature manifold included pressure gauges, gas connections, and a 56 Ls−1
                                       turbo-drag pump backed by an oil-sealed rough pump. Zeolite-filled traps prevented pump
                                       oil vapor and sample vapor from reaching the turbo pump. Aburner tube was used
                                       intermittently to destroy the trapped sample vapor. The burner tube was a stainless steel tube
                                       filled with copper wool and capped by a ceramic wool filters. An oven with ceramic fiber
                                       insulation surrounded the burner tube.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                       The quartz flexure reference pressure gauge had a full scale of 310 kPa, a resolution of 1 Pa,
                                       and a long-term stability of 31 Pa. I calibrated it against a vacuum-referenced piston gauge
                                       over the range from 2 kPa to 208 kPa, and I extrapolated the calibration to pressures below 2
                                       kPa by assuming that the gauge’s reading was a linear function of pressure. This assumption
                                       was verified by a plotting the CDG reading as a function of the quartz gauge reading; the
                                       deviations from a linear fit were smaller than 1mPa.




                                        J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                  Page 4


                            3. Preparing the apparatus
                            3.1 Baking to remove hydrogen
                                        Volatile impurities adsorbed onto the walls of the apparatus were removed by baking the
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        evacuated apparatus for 1 day at 200 °C. Afterwards, dP/dt measured in the empty apparatus
                                        was dominated by hydrogen outgassing, which occurs because all stainless steel components
                                        contain dissolved hydrogen [19,20]. It is not a concern when measuring pressures above 1
                                        Pa at temperatures below 100 °C, but at 200 °C I observed hydrogen outgassing that caused
                                        the pressure to rise as rapidly as 8 mPa s−1. To reduce that outgassing, the hot manifold was
                                        pumped and baked for at least one week at temperatures from 200 °C to 250 °C. A common
                                        procedure for degassing hydrogen is to bake the vacuum chamber at 400 °C for one day
                                        [19,20], but that temperature was too high for the valves and CDGs used here.

                                        Figure 4 shows the hydrogen outgassing that was typical for baking at 250 °C. The hot
                                        manifold without the sample tube was pumped for 12 h, and then the outgassing rate was
                                        measured by closing the valve to the pump and allowing hydrogen to accumulate for the
                                        next 12 h. Repeating this cycle for 7 days reduced the outgassing rate to approximately 0.01
                                        mPa s−1 at 250 °C; the outgassing at 200 °C was 10 times smaller. Adding the empty sample
                                        tube, which was made from type 304 drawn stainless steel, caused much larger outgassing.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        A model based on the manifold materials and geometry( Pcalc)indicated that the initial
                                        concentration of atomic hydrogen in the sample tube was 22 mol m-3. In contrast, the initial
                                        concentration in the remainder of the manifold, which was made of type 316 vacuum
                                        remelted stainless steel, was 100 times smaller[ 21].

                                        The hydrogen outgassing measurements and the model are discussed in a separate article
                                        [21]. Its chief results are:

                                            •    The hydrogen outgassing rate is controlled by the geometry of the vacuum
                                                 chamber’s components, the hydrogen dissolved in those components, and the
                                                 processes of diffusion, recombination, and trapping.

                                            •    Strongly bound or “trapped” hydrogen, which occurs at heterogeneities such as
                                                 dislocations and grain boundaries, can hold most of the dissolved hydrogen even
                                                 though those locations comprise fewer than 0.1 % of all lattice sites.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                            •    The amount of hydrogen initially present in a stainless steel component can vary by
                                                 a factor of 100.

                                            •    Baking at 250 °C for as long as two weeks may be necessary.

                            3.2 Calibrating the pressure gauges
                                        The CDGs were calibrated by comparing them to the reference pressure gauge. There were
                                        two types of calibration. A complete calibration was done after baking the empty hot
                                        manifold, which included the CDGs, and shorter “real-time” calibrations were done during
                                        the vapor pressure measurements. In the complete calibrations, nitrogen was used to vary the
                                        pressure from zero to full scale at a series of temperatures T, and the resulting difference
                                        between the true pressure P and the nominal pressure Pnom was expressed as a cubic
                                        function of Pnom,


                                         J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                      Page 5



                                                                                                                             (1)


                                        where the temperature dependence of each pressure coefficient was expressed as a quadratic
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        function of T. Figure 5 shows the typical variations of the linear coefficient between
                                        complete calibrations.

                                        The drift of the linear coefficient between calibrations could lead to an error as large as 1 %.
                                        Such errors were avoided during normal operation by performing the real-time
                                        measurements of kp0 and kp1 at each temperature, giving the true pressure



                                                                                                         (2)



                                        where Pnom was based on the most recent full calibration. The standard uncertainty of P
                                        combined the Type A (statistical) uncertainties of Pnom, kp0, and kp1 with the Type B
                                        uncertainty uB(dP/dPref) of the reference gauge as follows:

                                                                                                                                     (3)
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        The last term was negligible because uB(dP/dPref) = 0.0001. Figure 6 shows values of u(P)
                                        obtained for diethyl phthalate, ferrocene, and naphthalene during eight runs. The curves
                                        approximately describe the standard uncertainties as linear functions of pressure:


                                                                                                                      (4)




                            3.3 Correcting for hydrostatic head and thermal transpiration
                                        The difference in height between the pressure gauge and the sample, Δz = 0.2 m, caused a
                                        “hydrostatic” pressure difference ΔPz given by
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                                                                        (5)


                                        where M is the molecular mass of the vapor, g is the acceleration of gravity, and R is the
                                        universal gas constant. This correction was negligible; for TEMAH it was only 0.03 %.

                                        The difference between the temperatures of the pressure gauge and the sample, ΔT = 1 K,
                                        caused another pressure difference ΔPT due to thermal transpiration. Šetina [22] described
                                        the difference by




                                         J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                   Page 6




                                                                                                              (6)



                                       where f(Kn)is a function that goes to 0 when the Knudsen number Kn→∞, namely when P
NIST Author Manuscript




                                       → 0. At T= 300 K, the transpiration corrections for Kn= 1 and Kn= ∞ were respectively
                                       ΔPT/P= 0.11 %and 0.17% and therefore negligible. This correction was small because ΔT
                                       was small and Kn= 1 occur red only at P< 1 Pa. In contrast, if the pressure gauge had been
                                       held at the constant temperature of 200 °C, the correction at Kn= 1 would have been as large
                                       as 16 %.

                            3.4 Loading the sample
                                       A glove box filled with dry nitrogen (<10−5 mole fraction H2O) was used to load each
                                       sample into the sample tube. Before removing the sample tube from the glove box, it was
                                       sealed by attaching pneumatic valve #1( Figure 2). The sample tube and valve were then
                                       attached to the manifold, and the sample was degassed in situ by cyclic pumping, vacuum
                                       sublimation, or both methods.


                            4. Operation
NIST Author Manuscript




                            4.1 Degassing the sample
                                       This section describes the two methods that were used to degas the samples in situ, cyclic
                                       pumping and vacuum sublimation. The Appendix reviews degassing methods used
                                       elsewhere.

                                       4.1.1 Degassing by cyclic pumping—See Figure 7. Cyclic pumping periodically
                                       removed a known volume of vapor from the sample. It comprised as many as 100 repetitions
                                       of the following cycle:

                                            1.   Isolate the sample tube. (Close valve 1.)

                                            2.   Pump the vapor out of the hot manifold. (Open valve 2 to the hot manifold.)

                                            3.   Stop pumping and open the sample tube to the hot manifold. (Close valve 2 and
                                                 open valve 1.)
NIST Author Manuscript




                                       Degassing by cyclic pumping has the following advantages:

                                            •    The amount of sample removed per cycle is known even if the sample is in an
                                                 opaque container, as described below.

                                            •    The amount of sample removed is small if the sample vapor pressure and the
                                                 manifold volume are small.

                                            •    The cycle time can be adjusted to allow for the impurity’s speed of diffusion into
                                                 the vapor.

                                            •    It is easily automated.

                                       Assuming that the sample is a binary solution that consists almost entirely of compound
                                       “A”, the moles of A removed during a pumping cycle is:

                                         J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                               Page 7




                                                                                                (7)


                                where PVA is the vapor pressure of A. The amount of impurity “B” removed during the same
NIST Author Manuscript




                                cycle is proportional to the mole fraction yB of B in the vapor. Assuming Raoult’s law, yB is
                                given by


                                                                                                      (8)


                                where P is the total pressure, xB is the molar concentration of B in the liquid (or solid), kH is
                                Henry’s constant, and PVB is the vapor pressure of B. The moles of impurity “B” removed
                                during cycle “i” is then


                                                                                                                   (9)


                                Here, α is volatility ratio defined by
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                                                                            (10)



                                The impurity decrease per cycle Δx(i) is then given by



                                                                                                                     (11)



                                where nLA is the amount of compound A in liquid form. Equation (11) says that the impurity
                                decrease is proportional to α- 1, so little improvement is possible when the impurity has a
                                vapor pressure similar to that of compound A. Rewriting Eq. (11) as a differential equation
                                and integrating yields the Rayleigh distillation equation, Eq. (29) in the Appendix.

                                Figure 8 illustrates the degassing of diethyl phthalate by cyclic pumping. Possible impurities
NIST Author Manuscript




                                included nitrogen and maleic anhydride. The sample was held at Tsample= 99 ° C, and the
                                cycle comprised a 15 min evacuation of the hot manifold followed by a 15 min observation
                                of the increasing pressure. After 17 h, the rate of pressure increase was less than 0.3 Pa h−1.

                                The sample was then degassed further at temperatures as high as 159 °C. Figure 9 shows
                                subsequent measurements of vapor pressure at 99° C. Following an evacuation and the short
                                recovery from evaporative cooling, the pressure increased at less than 0.02 Pa h−1, which
                                was similar to the expected rate of hydrogen outgassing [21].

                                Stirring the diethyl phthalate was tried in one run at 99 °C. The stirrer was a stainless steel
                                ball bearing inside the sample tube that was periodically lifted and dropped by an external
                                magnet attached to a gearhead motor. Stirring caused only a small improvement of the
                                degassing, perhaps because boiling was already stirring the sample [17].


                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                            Page 8


                                4.1.2 Degassing by vacuum sublimation—Cyclic pumping may not be effective if the
                                impurity has a small diffusivity, which is more likely when the sample is solid. For example,
                                the self diffusivity of polycrystalline naphthalene near its melting point of 80 °C (D=
                                1×10−9m2s−1 [23]) is similar to that of the liquid (Wilke-Chang method [24,25]). However,
NIST Author Manuscript




                                at 40 °C, it is about 40 times smaller, and the diffusion time of a 10 mm deep sample is
                                approximately 18 days.

                                In contrast, vacuum sublimation works for solids as well as liquids [5]. It is a variation of
                                batch distillation that is performed at pressures below atmospheric. See, for example, [26].
                                The sample is evaporated in vacuum at temperature Tsample and condensed into a cold trap at
                                Ttrap< Tsample. Scientific laboratories typically use this method to remove an impurity of
                                lower volatility, which remains behind in the sample container. However, when the impurity
                                has a higher volatility, the entire sample is evaporated with the expectation that the impurity
                                will be more likely to pass through the trap to the vacuum pump.

                                The following steps were used:

                                    1.   Remove gas at atmospheric pressure: Freeze the sample in the sample tube at 77 K,
                                         open the vacuum pump, pump out all gas from above the sample, then close the
                                         sample tube and warm it to Tsample.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                    2.   Cool the cold trap to Ttrap, typically 77 K or 273 K, and open the sample tube to
                                         condense the sample into the trap. A warm value of Ttrap will allow an impurity of
                                         moderate volatility to pass through the trap, but it also will cause more of the
                                         sample to be lost to the pump.

                                    3.   Close the vacuum pump, warm the trap to Tair, cool the sample tube to 77 K, and
                                         then condense the sample back into the sample tube.

                                The efficiency of this method depends on Tsample, which controls the rate of evaporation,
                                Tair, which controls the sticking coefficient on the wall of the connecting manifold, and
                                Ttrap, which controls the relative amounts of sample and impurity that pass through the trap
                                to the vacuum pump.

                                The CDG pressure reading allowed the progress of the sublimation to be followed even
                                though the sample could not be seen inside the metal manifold. The pressure reading was
NIST Author Manuscript




                                always time dependent and smaller than the vapor pressure at Tsample. Its value was likely
                                determined by the flow conductance of the hot manifold and the flow rate through the
                                manifold.

                                The simple, all-metal, tube-in-tube design used here was adequate, but more elaborate
                                geometries are possible, such as the use of two intermediate traps by Pangrác et al. [15]. One
                                might also replace the intermediate traps by a long tube that functioned as a preparative
                                chromatograph. An attempt with a long coiled tube failed because condensate clogged the
                                bottom of the first coil.




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                   Page 9


                            4.2 Measuring PV(T)
                                        The apparatus was driven by a sequence of commands listed in a spreadsheet and
                                        implemented by the spreadsheet’s scripting language. Figure 10 shows a measurement run in
                                        which the temperature was increased in 10 K steps. At each temperature two or more
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        pumping cycles removed vapor, and a limited “real-time” calibration obtained the
                                        parameters kp0 and kp1 for both CDGs.

                                        Figure 11 shows details of the measurements. At 169 °C, where the sample was liquid, the
                                        pressure returned quickly to equilibrium after an evacuation, and subsequent variations were
                                        driven by small variations of the sample temperature. At 59 °C, where the sample was solid,
                                        the pressure equilibrated slowly.

                            4.3 Response times
                                        The speed of the vapor pressure measurements was limited by the slow responses of the
                                        apparatus and the sample. The slowest apparatus components were the CDGs, which
                                        required 2 h to stabilize after a change of 20 K. This long interval may have been due to the
                                        slow relaxation of mechanical stress. Although CDG manufacturers typically do not specify
                                        the relaxation time of their devices, variation among models is possible; the relaxation time
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        for a CDG made by another manufacturer was observed to be almost 4h.

                                        The sample’s response can be even slower due to the diffusion of a volatile impurity out of
                                        the condensed sample. Pumping on the sample reduces the impurity concentration at the
                                        sample surface and creates a concentration gradient within the sample. If the sample is a
                                        solid or an unstirred liquid, the gradient will relax with the characteristic time


                                                                                                    (12)


                                        where L is the sample’s effective diffusion length and D is the mass diffusion constant. Table
                                        2 gives example values of D and τD for various liquid mixtures. See the companion article
                                        [17] for details.

                                        The sample’s time constant for thermal equilibration was expected to be only about 100 s
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        [17]. However, that estimate, which assumed good contact with the container wall, may have
                                        been too small for a solid sample. Pumping on the sample preferentially evaporates the
                                        warm layer close to the wall, and the resulting gap has a low thermal conductance.

                                        Another slow process is redistribution of the sample when the temperature of the sample
                                        container has a nonuniformity ΔT0. As discussed in [17], transpiration will cause the
                                        difference between the measured pressure P and the vapor pressure PV(T0) at the container’s
                                        nominal temperature T0 to be approximately


                                                                                                             (13)




                                         J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                    Page 10


                                         Depending on the sample’s distribution in the container, the pressure difference can persist
                                         for hours.

                            4.4 Trapping vapor
NIST Author Manuscript




                                         During the measurements, zeolite trap #1 captured the vapor produced by degassing the
                                         sample and zeroing the CDGs. Afterwards, the trapped vapor was destroyed by warming the
                                         zeolite trap to 150 °C, heating the burner tube to 700 °C, and flowing air through the trap to
                                         drive the vapor into the burner tube. The vapor was oxidized to metal oxides and gases such
                                         as H2O and CO2. The oxides were trapped by the ceramic wool filter pad at the end of the
                                         burner tube, and the gases were exhausted outside the building.

                                         The zeolite trap was safer than a cryogenic trap because it required less attention. Any water
                                         already present in the zeolite enhanced the trap’s safety by promoting the oxidation of the
                                         vapor in the trap. Using only a small sample, typically 1 cm3, minimized the concerns of
                                         safety and disposal. Although this trap-and-burn scheme was suitable only for small
                                         amounts of vapor, it could handle a wide variety of compounds, which is useful for a
                                         scientific laboratory; see, for example, [15]. In contrast, the scheme used by a semiconductor
                                         fab can mitigate a large amount of vapor, but it must be optimized for a particular process
                                         chemistry.
NIST Author Manuscript




                            5. Results
                                         Figure 12 uses data for four compounds to show the range of data collected with the present
                                         apparatus. For naphthalene, ferrocene, and diethyl phthalate the vapor pressure Pv was
                                         defined to be the pressure measured when the condensed sample was in approximate
                                         equilibrium with its vapor. This occurred after the sample temperature had recovered from
                                         evaporative cooling, as discussed in [17], and before a significant amount of impurity had
                                         diffused out of the sample into the vapor. The Pv values for these three compounds are
                                         tabulated in Section 5.2. The results for TEMAH, which were affected by decomposition,
                                         are discussed in a separate section.

                            5.1 Purity
                                         Table 3 lists the as-received purities of the compounds and the methods used to purify the
NIST Author Manuscript




                                         samples further in situ. As discussed in the companion article [17], an impurity B with mole
                                         fraction xB in the sample and partial pressure PB in the vapor will cause a relative error of
                                         approximately



                                                                                                             (14)


                                         where PVB and PVA are the vapor pressures of the impurity and the pure compound. The
                                         error depends very much on the impurity, and one with a vapor pressure similar to PVA will
                                         have little effect. In contrast, dissolving only 3×10−6 mole fraction of nitrogen in
                                         naphthalene at 80 °C will double the observed pressure.




                                          J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                      Page 11


                                        A bound on the impurity concentration in the vapor (not the condensed sample) can be
                                        obtained from the time dependence of the pressure P(t) observed after pumping on the
                                        sample. At the time t= 0.01 τD, where τD is the time constant for mass diffusion, the partial
                                        pressure of the impurity PB will be given approximately by [ 17]
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                                                                            (15)



                                        For the first three compounds, the in situ purification typically reduced the pressure time
                                        dependence to below the measurement resolution of (dP/dt)/P ≈ 10−6s−1. For the typical
                                        time of τD= 14 h [ 17], the corresponding bound on the impurity concentration in the vapor
                                        is 0.05.

                                        For TEMAH, which decomposed continuously, the time dependence of the pressure was
                                        always large. As described in [17] and later in this article, fitting Eq. (18) to P(t)obtained the
                                        desired vapor pressure even when PB/PVA>1.

                            5.2 Naphthalene, ferrocene, and diethyl phthalate
NIST Author Manuscript




                                        Figure 13 shows that the scatter ΔPV among the values of PV was often larger than the
                                        pressure uncertainty u(P). The scatter was estimated by subtracting PV from a reference
                                        function PVref, and then calculating the standard deviations of PV - P Vref three points at a
                                        time.

                                        At low pressure ΔPV varied with the compound and was as much as 50 times larger than
                                        u(P). The curves on Figure 13 approximately describe ΔPV as follows.



                                                                                                                        (16)



                                        The following expression describes the total relative standard uncertainty of PV for these
                                        three compounds.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                                                                                           (17)



                                        The first term of Eq. (17) was usually negligible because u(T) = 9 mK; for example, it was
                                        0.0006 for naphthalene near its melting temperature of 353 K. There is no term for u(P)
                                        because it is implicitly included in ΔPV.

                                        Naphthalene—Figure 14 compares the naphthalene results to previous measurements.
                                        Above the melting temperature Tmelt, the values typically have standard uncertainties from
                                        0.02 % to 0.2 %, and they agree with previous results from Camin and Rossini [24], Fowler




                                         J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                     Page 12


                                     et al. [27], and Chirico et al. [28]. At the coldest temperature of 312 K, the values fall
                                     between the values of Růžička et al. [29] and Monte et al. [13].

                                     Ferrocene—Figure 15 compares present results for ferrocene from Kaplan et al. [31],
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     Edwards and Kington [32], Emel’yanenko [33], Siddiqi [34], Monte et al. [13], and Fulem et
                                     al.[ 35]. Except for the two coldest points at 312 K, the present data were reported
                                     previously by Fulem et al. [35]. In that work, the authors combined calculated ideal gas heat
                                     capacities and critically assessed experimental data for vapor pressure, crystalline heat
                                     capacity, and enthalpy of sublimation to obtain a consistent thermodynamic description.

                                     Diethyl phthalate—Figure 16 compares the present results to previous work by Rohác et
                                     al. [37], who used three methods to span the remarkably wide temperature range of 217 K.
                                     Below 350 K, the present results disagree with those of [37]by as much as 20 %, and the
                                     Knudsen and static results from [37]disagree by about 10 %.


                            6. Tetrakisethylmethylaminohafnium (TEMAH)
                                     Decomposition complicated the vapor pressure measurements of TEMAH. Figure 17 shows
                                     examples of the time-dependent pressure observed after opening the manifold to the sample
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     tube containing TEMAH. As discussed in the companion article [17], five processes
                                     contributed caused the time dependence:

                                         1.   Evaporative cooling at t= 0.

                                         2.   Temperature equilibration.

                                         3.   Generation of a volatile impurity by decomposition with reaction rate kA.

                                         4.   Removal of the impurity with effective reaction rate kB.

                                         5.   Diffusion of the impurity from the liquid to the vapor, characterized by the rate kD.

                                     Temperature equilibration was assumed to be finished after tfirst = 400 s, and the other
                                     processes were accounted for by the following equation, which was fitted to the data at times
                                     t> tfirst:

                                                                                                                                  (18)
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     Here,




                                                                                                                            (19)




                                     and the partition parameter γ is defined by




                                      J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                              Page 13




                                                                                                                  (20)



                                where m is the mass of the liquid sample, MA is the molar mass of TEMAH, and V1+ V2 is
NIST Author Manuscript




                                the volume of the vapor space. The equilibrium impurity pressure is related to the reaction
                                rates kA and kB by



                                                                                                 (21)


                                where PVB is the vapor pressure of the impurity, and the two time constants are defined by



                                                                                                                  (22)


                                The five fitted parameters in Eq. (18) are the pressures Pfit(0) and P1 (units Pa) and the rate
                                constants kA, kB, and kD (s−1). The most important is
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                                                                    (23)


                                which is the sum of PVA, the vapor pressure of the compound of interest, and PB(0), the
                                partial pressure of the impurity at t= 0.

                                The fitted value of Pfit(0) had a weak dependence on the range of data. As shown in Figure
                                18, decreasing the time of the first fitted point from the nominal value of tfirst = 400 s had the
                                largest effect at 39 °C, probably because boiling-induced stirring was smaller at colder
                                temperatures. Figure 17 shows that increasing tfirst to 800 s had little effect on Pfit(0). The
                                value tfirst= 400 s was chosen to minimize the statistical uncertainty of Pfit(0) at all
                                temperatures.

                                Separating PVA from Pfit(0) in Eq. (23) was possible because the measurements of P(t) were
                                preceded by cyclic pumping, which added an additional constraint. Figure 19 shows the
NIST Author Manuscript




                                periodic variations of P(t) that preceded a 6 h measurement: At t = 0 the sample tube
                                (volume V1) was opened to the total manifold volume (V1+ V2). At t = t1, the sample tube
                                was closed while the rest of the manifold was evacuated. During that second interval,
                                decomposition continued to increase the pressure in the sample tube. As explained in [17],
                                extrapolating the fitted pressure Pfit(t) to the time t2 allowed PVA to be estimated as :


                                                                                                           (24)



                                where the volume ratio is V12 ≡ V1/(V1+V2). Expansion of nitrogen gas from V1 to (V1
                                +V2) was used to measure V12.




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                  Page 14


                                Table 5 lists the present results for TEMAH, and Figure 20 compares them to previous
                                results using the following reference function.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                                                                          (25)



                                The relative standard uncertainty of PV was estimated as follows.



                                                                                                                                         (26)



                                Here, the uncertainty u(Pfit(0)) is the statistical uncertainty of Pfit(0) associated with fitting
                                Eq. (18), and the uncertainty associated with separating PVA from Pfit(0) was obtained by
                                multiplying the uncertainty of V12 by the derivative of Eq. (24) with respect to V12. Table 6
                                shows that these two uncertainties were dominant.

                                Figure 21 shows the fitted values of Pfit(0), P1, and the rate constants kA, kB, and kD. Also
                                shown is PVB, the vapor pressure of the assumed impurity, methylethylamine, which was
NIST Author Manuscript




                                described approximately by [40]


                                                                                                                        (27)


                                Methylethylamine was chosen because it can appear as a dominant species during atomic
                                layer deposition with TEMAH [41]. However, the vapor was not analyzed here, so perhaps
                                the decomposition created a different volatile impurity. For example, the unstable species
                                *NCH3C2H5 could have formed and decomposed to gases such as nitrogen, methane, and
                                ethane [42]. In any case, the derivation of Eq. (18) did not depend on the number of
                                decomposition species [17], and the fitted value of Pfit(0) was insensitive to the assumed
                                impurity vapor pressure PVB. Increasing the value of PVB by a factor of 104 did not change
                                Pfit(0) or its uncertainty. Knowing the decomposition products was not necessary to obtain
                                the vapor pressure of TEMAH.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                The curve drawn through the kA data is an approximate Arrhenius description of the
                                decomposition rate above 50 °C:

                                                                                                                 (28)



                                The curve drawn through the kD data is the estimate kD = π2D/L2, where the Wilke-Chang
                                method [24,25] was used to estimate the mass diffusivity D of methylethylamine in
                                TEMAH, and fitting the sample depth to the data yielded the reasonable value L= 1.4 mm.




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                                  Page 15


                            Acknowledgments
                                     I thank Michal Fulemand Kveta Růžička for encouragement and advice about measuring vapor pressures, Doug
                                     Meier for advice about metal organic chemistry, Kurt Benkstein for the loan of the glove box, and Jim Maslar and
                                     Don Burgess for helpful conversations. This work was funded in part by the NIST Office of Microelectronic
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     Programs.


                            References
                                     1. Soulet, A.; Duquesne, L.; Jursich, G.; Inman, R.; Misra, A.; Blasco, N.; Lachaud, C.; Marot, Y.;
                                        Prunier, R.; Vautier, M.; Anderson, S.; Clancy, P.; Havlicek, P. Semiconductor Fabtech. 27. 2005.
                                        Optimizing the selection and supply of Hf precursor candidates for gate oxide; p. 74-81.
                                     2. Ambrose, D. Vapor pressures. In: Le Neindre, B.; Vodar, B., editors. Experimental
                                        Thermodynamics, Vol II, Experimental Thermodynamics of Non-Reacting Fluids. Vol. Chapter 13.
                                        Butterworths; London: 1975.
                                     3. Ambrose, D. Vapour pressures. Chapter 7. In: McGlashan, ML., senior reporter, editor. Chemical
                                        Thermodynamics. Vol. I. The Chemical Society; London: 1973.
                                     4. Verevkin, SP. Phase changes in pure component systems: Liquids and gases. In: Weir, RD.; de Loos,
                                        TW., editors. Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Multiple Phases. Vol. Chapter 2.
                                        Elsevier; Amsterdam: 2005.
                                     5. Růžička, K.; Fulem, M.; Růžička, V. [accessed Oct. 2015] Vapor Pressure of organic compounds.
                                        Measurement and correlation. http://www.vscht.cz/fch/Kvetoslav.Ruzicka/
                                        ICTP_VaporPressureGroup.pdf
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     6. Weir, RD.; de Loos, TW., editors. Measurement of the Thermodynamic Properties of Multiple
                                        Phases. Elsevier; 2005.
                                     7. Raal, JD.; Mühlbauer, AL. Phase Equilibria Measurement and Computation. Taylor & Francis;
                                        Washington: 1998.
                                     8. Sasse K, Jose J, Merlin J. A static apparatus for measurement of low vapor pressures. Experimental
                                        results on high molecular-weight hydrocarbons. Fluid Phase Equilib. 1988; 42:287–304.
                                     9. Tobaly P. An apparatus for vapor pressure measurements of organic solids using a computer
                                        controlled null-detector. Rev Sci Instrum. 1991; 62:2011–2015.
                                     10. Allen JE, Nelson RN, Harris BC. Apparatus for measuring thermodynamic properties at low
                                          temperatures. Rev Sci Instrum. 1999; 70:4283–4294.
                                     11. Nasirzadeh K, Zimin D, Neueder R, Kunz W. Vapor-pressure measurements of liquid solutions at
                                          different temperatures: Apparatus for use over an extended temperature range and some new data.
                                          J Chem Eng Data. 2004; 49:607–612.
                                     12. Gorobei VN, Krutovskikh MP, Vitkovskii OS. Measurement methods and instruments for the
                                          saturated vapor pressure of oil products. Meas Tech. 2006; 49:265–269.
                                     13. Monte MJS, Santos LMNBF, Fulem M, Fonseca JMS, Sousa CAD. New static apparatus and vapor
NIST Author Manuscript




                                          pressure of reference materials: Naphthalene, benzoic acid, benzophenone, and ferrocene. J Chem
                                          Eng Data. 2006; 51:757–766.
                                     14. Fulem M, Růžička K, Růžička V, Šimeček T, Hulicius E, Pangrác J. Vapour pressure measurement
                                          of metal organic precursors used for MOVPE. J Chem Thermodyn. 2006; 38:312–322.
                                     15. Pangrác J, Fulem M, Hulicius E, Melichar K, Šimeček T, Růžička K, Moravek P, Růžička V,
                                          Rushworth SA. Vapor pressure of germanium precursors. J Cryst Growth. 2008; 310:4720–4723.
                                     16. Berg RF. Thermoelectric temperature control device for vapor pressure measurements. Rev Sci
                                          Instrum. 2011; 82:085110–6. [PubMed: 21895278]
                                     17. Berg RF. Correcting “static” measurements of vapor pressure for time dependence due to diffusion
                                          and decomposition. J Chem Eng Data. 2015
                                     18. Certain commercial materials or equipment are identified in this paper in order to specify the
                                          experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation
                                          or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply
                                          that the materials or equipment identified are the best available for the purpose.




                                         J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                Page 16


                                19. Redhead, PA. Ultrahigh and extreme high vacuum. In: Lafferty, JM., editor. Foundations of
                                    Vacuum Science and Technology. Vol. Chapter 11. Wiley; New York: 1998.
                                20. Outlaw, RA.; Tompkins, JG. Ultrahigh Vacuum Design and Practice. AVS; New York: 2009.
                                21. Berg RF. Hydrogen traps in the outgassing model of a stainless steel vacuum chamber. J Vac Sci
                                    Technol A. 2014; 32:031604–13.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                22. Šetina J. New approach to corrections for thermal transpiration effects in capacitance diaphragm
                                    gauges. Metrologia. 1999; 36:623–626.
                                23. Sherwood JN, White DJ. Self-diffusion in polycrystalline naphthalene. Phil Mag. 1967; 16:975–
                                    980.
                                24. Wilke CR, Chang P. Correlation of diffusion coefficients in dilute solutions. AICHe J. 1955;
                                    1:264–270.
                                25. Reid, RC.; Prausnitz, JM.; Poling, BE. The Properties of Gases and Liquids. 4. McGraw Hill; New
                                    York: 1987.
                                26. Růžička M, Fulem V, Růžička. Recommended vapor pressure of solid naphthalene. J Chem Eng
                                    Data. 2005; 50:1956–1970.
                                27. Camin DL, Rossini FD. Physical properties of fourteen API Research hydrocarbons, C9 to C15. J
                                    Phys Chem. 1955; 59:1173–1179.
                                28. Fowler L, Trump WN, Vogler CE. Vapor pressure of naphthalene. New measurements between 40
                                    and 180 C 13. J Chem Eng Data. 1968; 13:209–210.
                                29. Chirico RD, Knipmeyer SD, Nguyen A, Steele WV. The thermodynamic properties to the
                                    temperature 700 K of naphthalene and of 2,7-dimethylnaphthalene. J Chem Thermodyn. 1993;
                                    25:1461–1494.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                30. Růžička M, Fulem V, Růžička. Recommended vapor pressure of solid naphthalene. J Chem Eng
                                    Data. 2005; 50:1956–1970.
                                31. NIST Standard Reference Subscription Database 3, version 2-2012-1-Pro. wtt-pro.nist.gov
                                32. Kaplan L, Kester WL, Katz JJ. Some properties of iron biscyclopentadienyl. J Am Chem Soc.
                                    1952; 74:5531–5532.
                                33. Edwards JW, Kington GL. Thermodynamic properties of ferrocene. Part 2. Vapour pressure and
                                    latent heat of sublimation at 25°C by the effusion and thermistor manometer. Trans Faraday Soc.
                                    1962; 58:1323–1333.
                                34. Emel’yanenko VN, Verevkin SP, Krol OV, Varushchenko RM, Chelovskaya NV. Vapour pressures
                                    and enthalpies of vaporization of a series of the ferrocene derivatives. J Chem Thermodyn. 2007;
                                    39:594–601.
                                35. Siddiqi MA, Atakan B. Combined experiments to measure low sublimation pressures and diffusion
                                    coefficients of organometallic compounds. Thermochim Acta. 2007; 452:128–134.
                                36. Fulem M, Růžička K, Červinka C, Rocha MAA, Santos LMNBF, Berg RF. Recommended vapor
                                    pressure and thermophysical data for ferrocene. J Chem Thermodyn. 2013; 57:530–540.
                                37. Rohác V, Růžička K, Růžička V, Zaitsau D, Kabo G, Diky V, Aim K. Vapour pressure of diethyl
NIST Author Manuscript




                                    phthalate. J Chem Thermodyn. 2004; 36:929–937.
                                38. Rushworth SA, Smith LM, Kingsley AJ, Odedra R, Nickson R, Hughes P. Vapour pressure
                                    measurement of low volatility precursors. Microelectron and Reliab. 2005; 45:1000–1002.
                                39. [accessed Oct. 2015] Air Liquide, TEMAHf data sheet. http://www.engineering-
                                    solutions.airliquide.com/file/otherelement/pj/2d/8f/94/07/temahf1863163035765428806.pdf
                                40. Wolff H, Schiller O. The vapour pressure behavior and the association of N-methylethylamine,
                                    diethylamine and their N-deuterioanalogues in mixtures with n-hexane. Fluid Phase Equil. 1985;
                                    22:185–207.
                                41. Sperling BA, Kimes WA, Maslar JE, Chu PM. Time-resolved Fourier transform infrared
                                    spectroscopy of the gas phase during atomic layer deposition. J Vac Sci Techol A. 2010; 28:613–
                                    621.
                                42. Růžička, K. private communication. 2015.
                                43. Markham AE, Kobe KA. The solubility of gases in liquids. Chem Rev. 1941; 28:519–588.
                                44. Battino R, Clever HL. The solubility of gases in liquids. Chem Rev. 1966; 66:395–463.
                                45. Battino R, Evans FD. Apparatus for rapid degassing of liquids. Anal Chem. 1966; 38:1627–1629.


                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                      Page 17


                                     46. Hickman KCD. High-vacuum short-path distillation - A review. Chem Rev. 1944; 28:51–106.
                                     47. Hibben JH. Removal of dissolved gases from liquids by vacuum sublimation. Bur Stand J Res.
                                         1928; 3:97–104.
                                     48. Bell TN, Cussler EL, Harris KR, Pepela CN, Dunlop PJ. An apparatus for degassing liquids by
                                         vacuum sublimation. J Phys Chem. 1968; 72:4693–4695.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     49. Battino R, Evans FD, Bogan M. Apparatus for the rapid degassing of liquids. Part II. Anal Chem
                                         Acta. 1968; 43:520–522.
                                     50. Battino R, Banzhof M, Bogan M, Wilhelm E. Apparatus for rapid degassing of liquids. Part III.
                                         Anal Chem. 1971; 43:806–807.
                                     51. Halvorsen, IJ.; Skogestad, S. Theory of distillation. In: Wilson, ID.; Adlard, ER.; Cooke, M.;
                                         Poole, CF., editors. Encyclopedia of Separation Science. Vol. II. Academic Press; 2000.
                                     52. Seader, JD.; Siirola, JJ.; Barnicki, SD. Distillation. In: Perry, RH.; Green, DW.; Maloney, JO.,
                                         editors. Perry’s Chemical Engineers’ Handbook. Vol. chapter 13. McGraw-Hill; New York: 1997.


                            7. Appendix: Degassing methods used elsewhere
                                     Methods used to degas liquids have evolved slowly over the last 150 years; see the brief
                                     reviews that are included in articles by Markham and Kobe [43], Battino and Clever [44],
                                     and Battino and Evans [45]. See also Hickman’s review of vacuum distillation [46]. As early
                                     as 1855, Bunsen used boiling followed by cooling in a vacuum. In 1928, Hibben [47]
                                     described a method of vacuum sublimation and the conditions necessary for purification;
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     much later Bell et al. [48] published a similar method. Between 1966 and 1971, Battino and
                                     coworkers [44,45,49,50] developed a series of degassing methods, the last of which stirred a
                                     liquid while pumping the vapor space through a condenser. Battino and Clever [44]
                                     mentioned two simple methods that are still frequently used to degas liquids in the
                                     laboratory: freeze-pump-thaw and batch distillation. Here the discussion is limited to why
                                     these were inadequate for the present purpose.

                                     In the freeze-pump-thaw method, the sample is cyclically frozen, pumped under vacuum,
                                     and then allowed to thaw while it is valved off from the vacuum pump. This method is useful
                                     for removing a gas such as air from a liquid whose vapor pressure is so large that the sample
                                     would be lost when pumped at room temperature. However, it is not effective for removing
                                     an impurity that is much less volatile than air, especially if the impurity itself is frozen. Also,
                                     if the impurity has a vapor pressure below 100 Pa, a sample with a depth of only 10 mm will
                                     have a hydrostatic pressure that will suppress the formation of impurity vapor bubbles.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                     In batch distillation, one boils away under vacuum all but a fraction f of the liquid. The
                                     Rayleigh distillation equation [51,52] predicts that, if a boiling liquid is in equilibrium with
                                     its vapor, the concentration xB of the impurity will decrease by the factor



                                                                                                    (29)



                                     where α is the relative volatility defined by Eq. (10). In principle, this method would seem to
                                     be effective. For nitrogen dissolved in naphthalene at 80 °C, Eq. (29) predicts that boiling
                                     away only 0.01 % of the naphthalene (f = 0.9999) will decrease the nitrogen concentration to
                                     only 2×10−16 of its initial value. In practice, such improvement rarely occurs because
                                     maintaining the equilibrium state assumed by Eq. (29) is made difficult by the impurity’s


                                      J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                           Page 18


                                diffusion through the liquid. The sample cannot be stirred fast enough to ensure that the
                                impurity concentration at the liquid-vapor interface is the same as the concentration
                                elsewhere in the sample.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Rotating the container (Kugelrohr) is effective for a liquid sample because it creates a thin
                                film that decreases the length for mass diffusion. Unfortunately, incorporating rotation into a
                                bakeable all-metal apparatus designed for low pressures is difficult. The simple means of
                                stirring the sample described in Section 4.1 had little effect.

                                Pumping through a semipermeable membrane for two weeks was used by Růžička et al. [24]
                                to degas a sample of solid naphthalene. This innovative approach, which used a PDMS
                                (polydimethylsiloxane) membrane, was effective for gases of low molecular weight. It seems
                                unlikely that it could be used to remove a heavier hydrocarbon impurity.
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                         Page 19
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 1.
                                Two practices for measuring vapor pressure as a function of temperature. (a) Usual: The
                                temperature of the pressure gauge is held at a higher, fixed temperature, while the sample
                                temperature varies. (b) Alternate: The difference between the two temperatures is fixed. The
                                temperature of the pressure gauge was stepped before that of the sample.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                             Page 20
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 2.
                                Apparatus schematic. (1 Torr = 133 Pa)
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                      Page 21
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 3.
                                Photograph of the hot manifold, which comprised five valves, two CDGs, a thin-walled
                                sample tube, and a cold trap, all of which were connected by metal gasket fittings.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                      Page 22
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 4.
                                Baking the hot manifold at 250 °C for seven days slowly reduced the rate of hydrogen
                                outgassing. The pressure was measured while the manifold was cyclically evacuated for 12
                                hours and then closed for 12 hours to allow hydrogen to accumulate in the manifold. The
                                calculated pressure Pcalc is discussed elsewhere [ 21].
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                             Page 23
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 5.
                                Typical variations of the linear pressure coefficient kp1(T).
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                        Page 24
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 6.
                                Standard uncertainties of the pressure measurements for diethyl phthalate □, ferrocene ○,
                                and naphthalene ◇. The curves depict Eq. (4).
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                             Page 25
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 7.
                                Components used for degassing and cyclic pumping.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                        Page 26
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 8.
                                Partial degassing of diethyl phthalate by cyclic pumping at 99 °C. The cycle comprised a 15
                                min evacuation of the hot manifold followed by a 15 min observation of the increasing
                                pressure. After 17 h, the rate of pressure increase was less than 0.3 Pa h−1.
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                         Page 27
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 9.
                                Typical measurements of diethyl phthalate after degassing by cyclic pumping at 99 °C and
                                159 °C. Following the recovery from evaporative cooling, the pressure increased at less than
                                0.02 Pa h−1.
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                          Page 28
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 10.
                                A typical measurement run. The dense horizontal groups of points are the vapor pressure of
                                the naphthalene sample, and the sparse vertical groups are the pressure of nitrogen gas that
                                was used for a “real-time” pressure calibration at each temperature.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                         Page 29
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 11.
                                Details of Figure 10. At 169 °C (upper), the naphthalene sample was liquid, and the pressure
                                returned quickly to equilibrium after an evacuation. Subsequent variations of pressure were
                                driven by small variations of the sample temperature. At 59 °C (lower), the sample was
                                solid, and the pressure equilibrated slowly. The vapor pressure was obtained by averaging
NIST Author Manuscript




                                the data in the indicated 1 h intervals.




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                             Page 30
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 12.
                                Data collected with the present apparatus.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                        Page 31
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 13.
                                The measured scatter ΔPV was often larger than the pressure uncertainty u(P). The three
                                upper curves are approximate descriptions of ΔPV.
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                            Page 32
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 14.
                                Naphthalene results compared to previous results from Sasse et al. [ 8], Monte et al. [13 ],
                                Camin and Rossini [24], Fowler et al. [27], Chirico et al. [28], and Růžička et al. [29]. At the
                                coldest temperature of 312 K, the values fall between the values of [29] and [13]. The
                                reference function from[ 31]defines zero. Scatter dominated the uncertainty of the present
NIST Author Manuscript




                                results.




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                            Page 33
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 15.
                                Ferrocene results compared to previous results from Kaplan et al. [32], Edwards and
                                Kington [33], Monte et al. [13], Emel’yanenko et al. [34], Siddiqi and Atakan [35], and
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Fulem et al. [36]. Zero is defined by Eq. (3) of Fulem et al. [36]. Except for the two points at
                                312 K, the present data were reported previously in [36]. Scatter dominated the uncertainty
                                of the present results.




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                           Page 34
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 16.
                                Diethyl phthalate results compared to the reference function, Eq. (4) of Rohác et al. [37].
                                The standard uncertainty of the present results is comparable to or smaller than the size of
NIST Author Manuscript




                                the point above 330 K, and the uncertainty of the results from [37] is indicated by error bars
                                at selected temperatures.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                         Page 35
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 17.
                                Decomposition of TEMAH caused the pressure to be time dependent. UPPER: At 39 °C, the
                                decomposition rate was small and evaporative cooling was relatively large. The curves show
                                fits of Eq. (18) with various values of tfirst; Eq. (18) ignored temperature equilibration by
                                fitting only to data after t> tfirst. LOWER: At 99 °C, the decomposition rate was larger.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                           Page 36
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 18.
                                UPPER: The fitted value of Pfit(0) had only a weak dependence on the range of data.
                                Decreasing the time of the first fitted point from the nominal value of tfirst = 400 s had the
                                largest effect at 39 °C, probably because boiling-induced stirring was smaller at colder
                                temperatures. LOWER: The statistical uncertainty of Pfit(0) depended weakly on tfirst except
                                at 39 °C and 49 °C.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                        Page 37
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 19.
                                Cyclic pumping, followed by a long measurement of P(t). In periodic steady state, P(t0)=
                                P(t2) for each cycle.
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                    Page 38
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 20.
                                TEMAH results compared to data published by Rushworth et al. [38] and by Air Liquide
                                [39]. The reference function is Eq. (25).
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                        Page 39
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 21.
                                LEFT: Fitted values of the rate constants kA, kB, and kD. The curve drawn through the kA
                                data is an approximate Arrhenius description of the decomposition rate, Eq.( 28), and the
                                curve drawn through the kD data is an estimate based on the diffusivity of methylethylamine
                                in TEMAH.RIGHT: The vapor pressure PVB assumed for the impurity, Eq. (27), and the
NIST Author Manuscript




                                fitted values of Pfit(0) and P1.
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                        Page 40
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                Figure 22.
                                For Table of Contents use only. (R.F. Berg, Apparatus to measure the vapor pressure of
                                slowly decomposing compounds from 1 Pa to 105Pa )
NIST Author Manuscript




                                 J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                          Page 41




                                                                                           Table 1

                         The three layers of temperature control and the resulting standard uncertainty (k = 1) and stability of the
NIST Author Manuscript




                         sample temperature [16].

                                                       typical   uncertainty   stability
                          1     Laboratory             23 °C     0.15 K        0.20 K
                          2     Convection oven        70        0.25          0.10
                          3     Thermoelectric block   69        0.006         0.002
                                Sample tube            69        0.009         0.002
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                  J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                         Berg                                                                                                   Page 42




                                                                                         Table 2

                         Estimates of the mass diffusion constant D and concentration relaxation time τD= L2/(π2 D) in a liquid sample
NIST Author Manuscript




                         of thickness L= 10 mm at 80 °C [ 17].

                          liquid A            impurity B          PVB/PVA     D (10−9 m2s−1)   τD (h)

                          naphthalene         nitrogen            3.6 × 105   3.6               0.8
                          diethyl phthalate   nitrogen            2.5 × 107   0.23              12
                          diethyl phthalate   maleic anhydride    8.9 × 101   0.16              18
                          TEMAH               methyl ethylamine   2.4 × 103   0.37               8
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                  J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                                                                                         NIST Author Manuscript                                           NIST Author Manuscript                                        NIST Author Manuscript


                                                                                                                                                                            Table 3

                                                                         The as -received purity and the method used to purify the samples further in situ.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Berg




                                                                             chemical name CAS           source        initial mole fraction purity   purification method    final mole fraction purity   analysis method

                                                                                     naphthalene a    Sigma Aldrich               0.997               vacuum sublimation          e PB/PVA < 0.05            Eq. (15)
                                                                                          91-20-3

                                                                                       ferrocene b       Aldrich                  0.998               vacuum sublimation          e PB/PVA < 0.05            Eq. (15)
                                                                                         102-54-5

                                                                                diethyl phthalate c   Sigma Aldrich               0.995                 cyclic pumping            e PB/PVA < 0.05            Eq. (15)
                                                                                           84-66-2

                                                                                        TEMAH d       SAFC Hitech                 0.990                 cyclic pumping         f 0.03 < PB/PVA < 0.18        Eq. (18)
                                                                                      352535-01-4

                                                                         a
                                                                             bicyclo[4.4.0]deca-1,3,5,7,9-pentene
                                                                         b
                                                                             bis(η 5-cyclopentadienyl)iron
                                                                         c
                                                                          diethyl benzene -1,2-dicarboxylate
                                                                         d
                                                                             tetrakis(ethylmethylamino)hafnium
                                                                         e
                                                                             Bound on PB/PVA obtained from Eq. (15).

                                                                         f
                                                                             Range of PB/PVA obtained from fits to Eq. (18).




J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 43
                                                                                     NIST Author Manuscript                           NIST Author Manuscript                            NIST Author Manuscript


                                                                                                                                                   Table 4

                                                                         Vapor pressuresa of diethyl phthalate, naphthalene, and ferrocene. The liquid phase data are separated by a dashed line and indicated in bold font.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Berg




                                                                          diethyl phthalate     naphthalene         ferrocene

                                                                           T/K      PV/Pa      T/K      PV/Pa     T/K      PV/Pa

                                                                          312.211    0.32     312.203   40.84    312.204    3.69
                                                                          312.211    0.35     312.205   40.83    312.208    3.59
                                                                          322.213    1.05     317.210   63.26    322.209    9.00
                                                                          322.213    1.03     322.210   96.22    322.212    9.11
                                                                          332.211    2.69     327.211   144.65   332.202   20.78
                                                                          342.187    6.23     332.210   215.32   332.208   20.86
                                                                          352.183    13.58    337.206   315.04   332.211   20.71
                                                                          352.197    13.52    337.207   315.43   342.178   44.97
                                                                          362.198    27.75    342.185   455.65   342.179   45.17
                                                                          372.193    54.29    347.186   651.04   352.169   93.23
                                                                          372.200    54.07    347.187   650.96   352.169   92.72
                                                                          372.219    54.24    352.194   921.31   352.171   93.73

                                                                          382.225   100.85    357.190   1200.3   352.172   93.40
                                                                          392.241   182.06    357.191   1199.7   352.176   92.49
                                                                          402.368   316.85    362.196   1520.7   352.176   92.64
                                                                          412.380   530.31    367.209   1915.2   352.182   93.28
                                                                          422.489   862.13    367.209   1913.8   352.192   93.60
                                                                          442.276   2082.3    372.218   2393.5   362.170   185.07
                                                                          452.116   3098.9    377.219   2966.2   362.171   185.04




J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                                                                                              377.221   2966.9   362.184   185.43
                                                                                              377.223   2966.2   372.197   354.27
                                                                                              382.220   3656.6   382.193   650.79
                                                                                              387.227   4474.7   392.198   1158.2
                                                                                              387.232   4474.9   402.264   2000.5
                                                                                              387.233   4475.8   402.311   2008.1
                                                                                              392.242   5450.4   412.238   3345.9
                                                                                              397.269   6592.6   412.318   3360.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 44
                                                                         NIST Author Manuscript   NIST Author Manuscript            NIST Author Manuscript


                                                                                                                               diethyl phthalate        naphthalene           ferrocene

                                                                                                                                 T/K         PV/Pa     T/K      PV/Pa       T/K       PV/Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                               Berg




                                                                                                                                                      397.269   6593.1    422.287     5470.1
                                                                                                                                                      397.271   6595.6    422.403     5501.7
                                                                                                                                                      402.368   7961.5    432.418     8756.2
                                                                                                                                                      407.325   9502.4    442.265     13532

                                                                                                                                                      412.397   11329     452.085     19481
                                                                                                                                                      422.548   15876
                                                                                                                                                      432.579   21747
                                                                                                                                                      442.461   29184
                                                                                                                                                      452.367   38569

                                                                                                                           a

                                                                                                                                                      u(T) = 0.009 K
                                                                                                                               naphthalene            u(PV)/PV= 0.004 + (0.2 Pa)/PV
                                                                                                                               ferrocene              u(PV)/PV= 0.008 + (0.3 Pa)/PV
                                                                                                                               diethethyl phthalate   u(PV)/PV= 0.02 + (0.08 Pa)/PV




J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 45
                         Berg                                                                                            Page 46




                                                                                    Table 5

                         Vapor pressures and standard uncertainties of TEMAH.
NIST Author Manuscript




                           T/K      PV/Pa        u(PV)/Pa

                          312.194   2.96    ±      0.07
                          322.200   7.15    ±      0.05
                          332.202   15.87   ±      0.05
                          342.179   32.87   ±      0.13
                          352.192   64.4    ±      0.3
                          362.195   121.0   ±      0.8
                          372.213    216    ±       2
                          382.212    370    ±       5
                          392.238    591    ±       14
NIST Author Manuscript
NIST Author Manuscript




                                                J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                                                                                     NIST Author Manuscript                         NIST Author Manuscript                            NIST Author Manuscript


                                                                                                                                                 Table 6

                                                                         100 times the dimensionless standard relative uncertainties: 100u(PV)/PV. The four middle columns correspond to the four terms of Eq. (26).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Berg




                                                                           T (K)     T      P     Pfit(0)   V12    total
                                                                          312.194   0.06   0.39   2.30      0.30   2.35
                                                                          322.200   0.06   0.19   0.61      0.21   0.67
                                                                          332.202   0.05   0.11   0.20      0.18   0.30
                                                                          342.179   0.05   0.08   0.33      0.19   0.39
                                                                          352.192   0.04   0.07   0.35      0.25   0.44
                                                                          362.195   0.04   0.06   0.60      0.30   0.67
                                                                          372.213   0.04   0.05   0.88      0.39   0.97
                                                                          382.212   0.03   0.05   1.17      0.55   1.30
                                                                          392.238   0.03   0.05   2.15      0.94   2.34




J Chem Eng Data. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 01.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 47
